Department of Education in Social Sciences 
National Council of Educational Research and T raining 
New Delhi  Personal Finance 
Supplementary R eading
Material 

Personal Finance is an aspect of our lives which everybody needs to know about, 
wants to know about and often feels lost about how to deal with it. We believe 
learning to deal with this from school onwards will help in financial inclusion. If 
individuals and households are financially literate to make informed decisions about 
how to save, borrow and invest, this may help generate a sense of financial well 
being . 
The present book also includes a discussion on helping the financially marginalised 
also improve their situation, because children need to be sensitised to such issues of 
access and social justice. 
The NCERT has been receiving requests from the Ministry of Human Resources and 
Development and Ministry of Finance, Income Tax Department for inclusion of 
personal finance and components of taxation in the school curriculum. The Reserve 
Bank of India has also constituted a Core Committee on Financial Education of which 
NCERT is a member . Thus, the present book is an outcome of the initiatives by several 
organisations to impart financial education among young learners, enabling the 
country to pursue its goal of financial inclusion. This practical- oriented material has 
been developed by the Department of Education in Social Sciences, National Institute 
of Education to supplement the material already developed in Commerce and 
Economics. 
It has taken a little longer than expected to develop this material because it is the first 
of its kind. Several academics in the country have also been looking forward to it, to 
use in their teaching . The Council welcomes comments and feedback from all users, 
viz., students, parents, teachers and others interested in promoting financial 
education. FOREWORD 
Parvin Sinclair 
Director 
National Council of Educational 
Research and T raining 
New Delhi 
CONTENTS
1. Financial Plan ..................................................................... 1-6 
2. Budgeting ............................................................................... 7-13
3. Managing Y our Money ........................................................... 14-28 
4. Financing Assets .................................................................... 29-39 
5. Protection of Assets ............................................................... 40-53 
6. Investing Money .................................................................... 54-62 
7. Retirement Planning ............................................................... 63-71 
8. Taxes and Y ou ........................................................................ 72-82 
9. Career Planning ...................................................................... 83-86 ....Page No. Chapters 
Department of Education in Social Sciences 
National Council of Educational Research and T raining 
New Delhi 
Acknowledgements 
We are grateful to the following for their comments and suggestions during the workshop: Prawin Kumar 
and Monika Bhatia from the Department of Income Tax, M.M. Goel and J. Khunthia from the University of 
Delhi, Neeti Agrawal, Kamal Vagrecha and Subodh Kesharwani from the IGNOU , Sashikala from Mount 
Carmel School, Shrutibodh Aggarwal from Delhi Administration and Shobhna Nair from Mother's 
International School. Team Members 
Ashita R aveendran 
Minoo Nandrajog 
Neeraja R ashmi Jaya Singh 
M.V. Srinivasan 
Shipra V aidya 
Concept & Creative  by: Design
Jeetendra Solanki
National Centre for Financial Edu cation

01FINANCIAL PLAN CHAPTER 1 
Anita and Raju are two children wondering why their parents are always debating over household 
expenses. They often, hear them talk about saving for buying another car, new model of television, double -
door refrigerator , latest model of washing machine and so on. There seems to be a never ending list and 
nobody seems to agree upon any purchase of a particular item. The children desire an LCD television set, 
their mother wants a refrigerator while father wants to possess a new car and grandparents want to 
deposit money in the bank to be used at a later date. The priorities of the family members differ in terms of 
their needs, utility and the price of various household items. However , all of them are making a choice 
which has financial implications for the family . The option will require a careful analysis of the families' 
income, expenses and savings. Since the amount of money available with the family is limited, some 
purchases may have to be deferred or postponed to a future date. Therefore, it would be appropriate if they 
decide in advance what to buy keeping in view their income and expenses. They take a decision to 
purchase a car as it would serve the interest of all and everyone will enjoy its benefits. 
All of us at some time or the other have taken major and minor financial decisions in our life. Your 
parents may have asked you to choose between going for a school trip or purchase a new computer game. 
The school trip may cost ` 3000/- and the computer game  3500/-. Even if you do not have any income `
02you have been involved in financial decision making . Sometimes your parents may have deferred buying 
you a new bicycle because their house loan instalment had to be paid. We are all part of the financial 
decision making process and are affected by our family's financial situation. You have observed in your 
daily life that spending , financing , investing are becoming part of your routine activities. These decisions 
are all components of personal finance. Therefore, personal finance can be said to be the process of 
planning your spending , financing and investing activities that affect your financial situation. However , 
before you begin to plan, you will have to think about your needs and then accordingly prioritise your goals. 
Thus, the process of financial planning will include two steps: 
(I) to specify your goals, and 
(ii) to describe your spending , financing and investing plans to achieve those goals. 
Financial planning helps you to ensure that you will have funds available to meet your present as well as 
future needs.
In India, there is a culture of saving for some future event or contingency or an asset to be acquired. 
Usually , some money is kept aside for this if it is surplus. In the middle income groups, there may be little or 
no savings due to high prices of essential items. This is where it becomes important to think of a personal 
financial plan. In contrast in advanced countries, like America, individuals tend to rely too much on credit 
cards which sometimes puts them in debt. They do not think of saving money and usually spend all their 
monthly income. Despite the difference in the cultural as well as economic position of the countries all 
individuals need to plan their finances in order to have some surplus and avoid debt.
When people or households do not have any savings, it becomes problematic in difficult times or 
emergencies like paying for hospital expenses, repairs in case of accident or other necessities. Similarly , if 
you have savings then there are numerous options to channelise your savings such as like bank deposits, 
insurance plans, shares etc. Thus, being financially prepared for such exigencies makes life much easier . 
Once you have a financial plan, a lot of financial issues relating to savings and expenses get streamlined.
Why Personal Finance 
The main purpose of personal finance education is to positively influence financial behaviour . It has been 
observed that such education is delivered more effectively to younger children than to their older 
counterparts. Knowledge of personal finance is beneficial for everyone in many ways.
Make your own financial decisions 
An understanding of personal finance helps you take informed decisions about your financial situation. 
When you spend money on a particular thing you are giving up something else. For example, if you 
purchase a book for `. 500/- you are sacrificing maybe, a video game of the same amount or you could 
have saved that money for the future. There are various alternatives which you could have considered and 
you have to choose one and forgo the others. What you give up as a result of your buying decision is what 
we call opportunity cost. 
Evaluate the advice of financial advisors 
You may have come across various insurance agents, trying to sell policies or agents for different mutual 
funds. If you are aware of financial matters then it becomes easy to assess the various alternatives given 
by financial advisors. Financial advisors usually give you advice and guide you on your savings and 
investment. They may sometimes make false claims and guarantee high returns on particular 
investments. Your understanding of personal finance will enable you to determine whether their advice is 
in your best interests or theirs.
Become a financial advisor 
There are many people who do not understand financial matters or are not interested in taking financial 
decisions at all. At times, many employees go on paying high taxes because they do not know that by 
investing in certain securities or contributing to their provident funds they may save on taxes. There is a 
demand for financial advisors and a course in personal finance or other finance related courses can help 
you pursue a career as a financial advisor . They usually charge a commission on the amount of investment 
made from the source of the securities, for example, the post office or the company connected with the 
mutual funds. At a later stage, if they are enterprising and have a good understanding of financial matters 
they get paid for their specialised knowledge. 
Instilling Financial Discipline 
All of us need to be disciplined when it comes to spending money . If you have to live with a limited income 
your expenses have to be regulated. Same is true for your pocket money; you have to make sure your 
money lasts through the whole month. Parents have to make sure that the money is not misused and is 
judiciously spent. 
03Each individual or family is different so will have their own financial plans. One cannot expect to 
have same financial plan as another even if two people are earning the same salary . This is 
because financial situations and risk taking ability are different. Suppose a person already has 
to pay a housing loan instalment (EMI) and take care of other personal responsibilities, then his 
risk taking ability would be much lower than a person who does not have to repay a loan. 
How exactly do you go about preparing a financial plan?
▪ Assess your finances. Make a list of your bank accounts, investments, fixed deposits, 
mutual funds, shares etc. 
▪ What are your expenses per month? How much do you spend on rents or instalments 
(EMIs), your kids' education, monthly kitchen expenses and so on. You will be able to 
understand where you are with respect to your income, expenses and savings.
▪ Now the next step would be to list down your goals which could be short term, medium 
term or long term.
  Your short-term goals could be buying a car or going on a vacation, let us presume in the 
next 5 years. 
   Your medium-term goals could be your child's education, buying a house, or setting up your 
own business. This could be planned for may be 10-15 years. 
  For long-term goals you could plan for 20 years after and think of retirement, clearing all 
loans and keeping some money aside for emergency . 
▪ There are three parameters which you have to consider –time, money you can save and the 
rate of return.
▪ Based on your goals and your risk taking ability , you can diversify your money among 
different asset categories such as shares, bonds, fixed deposit and cash. 
Source:  The Economic Times Preparing a financial plan - PRACTICAL CONSIDERA TIONS 
04Components of a Financial Plan 
In a financial plan there are personal finance decisions related to six major areas. 
I) Budgeting 
ii) Managing your money 
iii) Financing large purchases 
iv) Protecting assets 
v) Investing money 
vi) Planning your retirement 
vii) Tax Planning
Budgeting 
We have heard people say that spending is going out of our budget. What is a budget? A budget is a 
statement of your income, expenses and saving . Budgeting therefore, is the process of forecasting future 
income and expenses for a given period. The surplus shown in your budget would be savings. Savings 
may be less or more depending upon how much you spend. Budgeting can therefore help you estimate 
how much of your income is required for monthly expenses and how much you will be able to save each 
month. You may use your saving for investing in bank deposits or in the financial mark ets or purchasing an 
asset such as a car or paying off your loan. Budgeting is a process where you evaluate your current 
financial position by assessing your income, expenses, assets and liabilities. Your budget is influenced by 
your income because you can only spend what you earn. Then the next step in the budgeting process is to 
estimate your expenses to be incurred every month. If you are able keep current expenditure levels low, 
your savings will be higher and you will be able to accumulate wealth in the future. Budget is the 
foundation of your financial plan, as it provides a base for making personal financial decisions.
 
Managing your money 
You need cash to meet your daily expenses. Cash is required for daily minor expenses as well as major 
contingencies like repairs or medical treatment etc. For all this access to funds is necessary to cover any 
short-term cash needs. Your liquidity position is basically determined by how much cash you have in hand 
or what can be accessed immediately . Money management and credit management are two techniques 
to enhance your liquidity position. Money management involves decisions regarding how much money to 
carry in liquid form and how much to allocate to short-term investment. Credit management involves 
decisions about how much credit you need to support your spending and the sources of credit to use. If 
you fall short of money then what other sources can you fall back on? Can you go to a bank, friends, 
employer or credit card facility? Credit card facilities should be used less as interest rates are exorbitant. It 
is normally used to cover expenses that cannot be covered by current income.
Financing large purchases 
Huge expenditures like purchase of a car or a house often are financed by a loan. How much loan to take 
will depend upon your savings and the purchase price of the assets. The capacity to repay the loan is also 
an important consideration. Loans are available in easy instalment of monthly , six monthly or annual 
system of repayment. The interest rate charged also is different for different schemes of loan and its 
repayment. There are, therefore, four things to consider: (i) how much loan to take, (ii) Maturity or length 
of the loan (iii) Interest rate and (iv) Instalment plan. 
Protecting assets 
Insurance plans are available to protect your assets. Insurance companies offer different types of 
insurance policies with varying amounts of premium to be paid depending on the risk associated. Car 
insurance, house insurance, health insurance are some of the popular policies for different amounts. 
Investing money 
05The extra funds which you have can be invested in shares, bonds, mutual funds and property to earn a 
higher return. You may invest your saving in bank deposits for different periods with varied rates of interest 
if you wish to opt for a safe investment. Or if you are willing to take risk you may invest in the capital 
mark et, i.e., in shares or bonds or mutual funds. A risk return analysis may be done and funds may be 
invested according to your requirement.
Planning your retirement 
After retirement you do not get a fixed amount as salary , therefore a certain amount must be set aside and 
invested so that some return is assured at a later stage. This type of planning could be done well in 
advance so that sufficient money is accumulated to support yourself and your family . For example, you 
may be investing in provident funds, public provident fund, national saving certificate, etc., which can give 
you an income after retirement. 
Tax Planning 
Taxes are an essential component of financial plan. Whatever you earn, part of it has to be paid to the 
Government in the form of taxes. However , tax planning enables you to plan your investment in such a way 
so as to minimise your tax. 
Have a plan and watch your investments grow 
Discipline 
Discipline is a key to managing your money better . Go through these points and add others. 
Having a discipline and planning for the future is a must. One must adopt a method, i.e., asset 
allocation and stick to investment in various assets and financial products without getting 
swayed by short-term changes. 
Financial Plan 
Determine your financial goals, get a certified financial planner to help you reach your financial 
goals based on the risk you wish to take. 
Stick to your financial plan and do not get swayed away with new products and new promises. 
There are many investment proposals that promise to double your money in a year. There is a 
need to filter the advice of financial advisors. 
Managing the Portfolio 
Financial plans result in arriving at an asset allocation which takes into account risks, returns 
as well as liquidity . When there are changes in the mark et, asset allocation needs to be 
reviewed. New offers like online investments, digital tax returns can be some of the change 
agents, we may have to learn to live with. Financial plans help in judiciously allocating money 
in different assets. 
Buy Life Insurance 
Buy the cover that you need today . Remember to get the terms plan first so that the sums 
assured is adequate for your family needs. 
Close all unnecessary bank accounts 
How many of us opened new bank accounts with each new job and haven't even check ed the 
balance in these accounts in the past one year. 
As evident, children are fast becoming part of the financial decision making process in their families. 
Awareness of personal finance enables them to reflect upon crucial details such as interest rates, 
mortgages, credit cards, saving , investment and expenditure and helps them to prepare for uncertainty in 
life. The value of living within one's means and saving as much money provides for a good financial 
outcome as well as a guarantee for the future. Pay full credit cards bill on due date 
Remember if you do not pay the entire bill on the due date, interest is charged from the date of 
spending and not the due date for payment. That factor alone can push up the credit rate to over 
40% per annum and this makes it probably the most expensive form of credit. 
Source: The Economics Times 
06
07BUDGETINGCHAPTER 2
When we get cash in the form of pocket money from our parents or salary from our employer on the first of 
every month, it seems to disappear very fast. What did we spend it on? We have nothing to show for it. 
This happens because we do not correctly assess our expenses and plan accordingly . Therefore, we need 
to be in control of our personal finances. 
If we make a budget, a statement showing cash flows and a personal balance sheet we know what our 
position is and what further steps may be taken to control the situation. A budget, as we all know , is a 
statement showing future income, expenses and savings. It is based on some estimates. 
These estimates are one income which are our source of cash inflows and expenses which are cash 
outflows. We need to prepare a personal cash flow statement which measures cash inflows and cash 
outflows. By keeping a check on our cash outflows we may be able to monitor our spending and allocate 
some amount towards savings. 
Cash Inflows – Where does our cash come from ? 
For working people, salary is the main source of cash inflows. Other sources may be interest from bank 
08deposits, dividends on shares or rent from property . 
Cash Outflows – Where does our cash go ? 
Cash outflows are in the form of expenses. Expenses will include both large and small. In our daily life we 
incur so many small expenses like buying groceries, paying for our bus tickets, paying bills for telephone, 
water and electricity which may all add up to huge amounts. Paying rent, purchasing a car or paying your 
monthly instalments are examples of large expenses. It is normally the small expenses which go out of 
hand and is difficult to keep track of them. Recording these transactions will help you sum up your cash 
outflows. 
Preparing a personal cash flow statement 
Now that you have an idea of your cash inflows and outflows, it is easy to prepare a personal cash flow 
statement. First of all you need to record your cash inflows, i.e., how much is your income, how much 
cash you receive from interest or dividend or any other source. 
Then, you may add up your expenses for that period (it may be monthly or annually). Thereafter , by 
deducting your expenses (outflows) from your income (inflows) you will arrive at the figure of net cash 
flows. 
Some tips about budgeting 
Budgets are necessary . 
They're the only practical way to get a grip on your spending and to make sure your money is 
being used the way you want it to be used. 
Creating a budget generally requires three steps. 
▪ Identify how you're spending money now.
▪ Evaluate your current spending and set goals that take into account your long-term financial 
objectives. 
▪ Track your spending to make sure it stays within those guidelines. 
Electronic devices like mobile phone, calculator , digital diaries, laptop, etc., can be used for 
recording income and expenses. 
You can create your personal financial statement so as to get a quick check on your financial 
position. 
Don't overburden yourself . Monitor your spending but don't get over involved with accounting 
for every rupee. 
Example 
Arun after finishing college gets a placement as an Assistant Manager with a business firm exporting 
garments. The firm pays him a salary of ` 27,000/- per month. After paying taxes of ` 2000/- Arun wants to 
monitor his spending so he decides to prepare personal cash flow statement for the last month. Arun does 
not have any other source of income from interest or dividends. He has expenses like travelling to his place 
of work, he pays ` 3000/- as conveyance p.m. to the taxi driver , his mobile telephone charges costs him ` 
1000/-, he contributes ` 5000/- to household kitchen expenses, he decides to buy a gift for his parents for 
` 2500/- from his first earnings and ` 3000/- he spends on tea/coffee with his friends. 
09Personal cash flow statement for Arun 
Cash inflows 
Salary                                           
Interest on deposits                                
Dividend income                                     
Less income tax                              
Total cash inflows                         27,000 
 25,000  2000 0 0 
Cash outflows 
Travelling expenses     
Mobile telephone 
Household expenses 
Parents' gift 
Recreation (tea/coffee)
Total cash outflows  3000 
1000 
5000 
2500 
 3000 
14,500 
deposits, dividends on shares or rent from property . 
Cash Outflows – Where does our cash go ? 
Cash outflows are in the form of expenses. Expenses will include both large and small. In our daily life we 
incur so many small expenses like buying groceries, paying for our bus tickets, paying bills for telephone, 
water and electricity which may all add up to huge amounts. Paying rent, purchasing a car or paying your 
monthly instalments are examples of large expenses. It is normally the small expenses which go out of 
hand and is difficult to keep track of them. Recording these transactions will help you sum up your cash 
outflows. 
Preparing a personal cash flow statement 
Now that you have an idea of your cash inflows and outflows, it is easy to prepare a personal cash flow 
statement. First of all you need to record your cash inflows, i.e., how much is your income, how much 
cash you receive from interest or dividend or any other source. 
Then, you may add up your expenses for that period (it may be monthly or annually). Thereafter , by 
deducting your expenses (outflows) from your income (inflows) you will arrive at the figure of net cash 
flows.
Net Cash Flows 25,000-14,580 = ` 10,500 
The excess cash of ` 10,500 he can allocate to savings and other purposes. 
Basically , to increase your net cash flows you will either have to earn more or spend less, i.e., maximize 
cash inflows and minimize cash outflows.
Factors affecting cash flows 
We will have to analyse both cash inflows and cash outflows. It is only the net cash flows which enhance 
your wealth since you can save it or invest it further to earn a higher income. 
Cash Inflows 
Your income is the major source of cash inflows. Your qualifications and the stage at which you are in are 
the two factors affecting your income level. Then other sources are interest income, dividend, rent from 
property etc. 
10Stage in career path 
People at initial stages of their career earn a lower salary . As they grow and develop in their career , their 
salaries increase, allowances increase, their experience enables them to get other higher post jobs, etc. 
This normally has a direct correlation with your age. The older you get your salary structure and status 
improve. But it may so happen that when jobs are changed older people do not get the commensurate 
salary . Your cash inflows or your salary therefore depends upon your career and the stage of your career . 
Type of job 
Some jobs are very well paid. In India, professionals or people with specialized skills earn much more. 
Engineers, management professionals, lawyers, are usually paid higher salaries. Doctors who are also 
highly qualified, unfortunately , in India, are not well paid. If you are self employed, then your cash inflows 
will depend upon the hard work and the time, energy and dedication you put into your work. 
Number of working people in your household 
The households' cash inflows also depends upon the other earning members in the household. Obviously , 
the household with more than one income earner will be more comfortable and the total cash inflows will 
increase. 
Cash Outflows 
Cash outflows are the expenses incurred on various items and assets. These depend upon the person's 
family size, age and consumption patterns.
Family size 
If you are the only earning member and supporting a large family , then expenses will be high. It also 
depends upon the number of school going children where high fees are to be paid, expenditure on clothing , 
transport, etc., will also be high. Where the numbers of dependants are less, expenses are lower and 
these households normally have a capacity to save. 
Age 
As people grow older their expenses change and they may tend to spend on assets like cars, houses, land, 
etc. Their expenditure on school tuition fees, household items decreases and they have more cash to 
spare for purchasing a house or a car or going for vacations abroad. And then they may still have some 
money to spare for investing . 
Personal consumption patterns 
People have different consumption patterns, some like to spend extravagantly and spend most of their 
money on expensive things as soon as they get their salary . Middle class families usually spend their 
money in the beginning of the month and they are left with little to save. Then there are some people who 
are always saving for some contingency or some dream house they want to buy. Their expenditure is the 
bare minimum but their savings are large. Cash flows will therefore depend upon consumption behaviour . 
Savings will also depend on a family's/individual's consumption pattern and spending . Consumption 
pattern is also affected by the amount you have to spend. The income you earn will determine your 
consumption behaviour like if there are two persons earning in the family , that household spends more.
Preparing a Budget 
In the personal cash flow statement, we recorded actual income, expenses and savings. If we need to find 
out net cash flows in the future we can forecast the cash inflows and outflows for each item on the 
personal cash flow statement. This cash flow statement based on forecast income and expenses for a 
future time period is called a budget. 
A budget may be prepared to determine whether your income (cash inflows) will be sufficient to take care 
11of the expenses (cash outflow) that you are likely to incur in the next month. It is possible that your 
expenses (out flows) are less in the next month and you may be able to save the excess amount of cash for 
purchasing something you want. Or else your expenses will exceed your income (cash inflows) and you 
will have to make some kind of arrangement either borrow or pay through your credit card to cover your 
extra expenses. If you know in advance what is to be done, you are better prepared to face the situation. 
In the same example taken earlier , suppose Arun anticipates his spending to go up next month by ` 1000/- 
due to extra travelling and he would have to pay ` 12,000/- towards his father's medical treatment.
Revised personal cash flow statement 
Cash Inflows 
Salary
Interest on deposits 
Dividend income
Less income tax
25,000Next month Last month 
 27,000  27,000 
0 0 
0 0 
 2000  2000
25,000
Cash Outflows 
Parents' gift 
Travelling expenses (1000)
Mobile telephone 
Household expenses 
Recreation  
Medical treatment 
Net cash flows -   2500 
 4000 3000 
1000 1000 
5000 5000 
3000 3000
14000  - 
27,000   14,500 
(-2000) (+10,500) 
Thus, we see that next month there is an unexpected cash payment of medical expenses for which Arun 
will fall short by ` 2000. He then has to arrange for this contingency . 
Create your own budget 
Assess your monthly expenses. 
Make sure you record all your regular monthly expenses, including what you spend on eating 
out, entertainment and hobbies. 
Total your earnings. 
Calculate how much you make per month, including any money that you receive from 
investments and other forms of residual income. 
Match your expenses with earnings. This will test how effective your budget is and how much 
you have left over at the end of the month. 
12Why prepare a budget? 
Preparing a budget actually helps in anticipating cash shortages, checking the accuracy of the budget and 
forecasting net cash flows for future.
 
Anticipating cash shortages 
If you are lik ely to have a cash shortage in the next month you can mak e arrangements to overcome it. 
Maybe you could withdraw funds from another account and manage somehow . If the amount is large, you 
might need to borrow from a friend or relative or maybe take a loan against a fixed deposit or dissolve the 
fixed deposit. The deficiency can be covered if one is forewarned and has sufficient time to arrange for 
funds. An emergency fund could also be created and some money kept aside for such purposes. 
Assessing the accuracy of the budget 
Since a budget is a statement of anticipated cash inflows and outflows, it will be generally prudent to 
compare the actual cash flows with forecast cash flows. Usually , we tend to overestimate cash inflows 
(income) and underestimate a cash outflows (expenses), as a result the net cash flows are less than 
expected. Budgeting , therefore, helps us to limit our spending so as to adjust to the limited income 
inflows. Or else, we try to increase our income to pay for those extra comforts. 
Forecasting net cash flows 
Budgets can be prepared weakly , monthly or annually . Expenses can be forecast months in advance and 
by following the same procedure a sum total of cash outflows can be determined. Similarly , if there are any 
other sources of income like interest on fixed deposits, or rent from property they can also be summed up 
for each period and net cash flows can be computed. In this manner , at least over the next few months, 
things can be quite accurately predicted.
Positive net cash flows 
If positive net cash flows over a period of time are anticipated, you can plan for purchasing property , can or 
actually buying in instalments and pay equated monthly instalments (EMIs) towards owning an asset. 
These positive net cash flows are your savings which can turn into investments. You may invest your Rework your budget. 
If your expenses exceed your income; you will have to cut down unnecessary expenses. 
Keep some money for debt reduction. 
Your budget should have provision for paying off your debts each month. 
In case of huge debts it is better to sacrifice and make a lump sum payment. A part of your 
income may be saved for an emergency , retirement investments, vacation, family 
celebrations, etc. These financial goals may be highlighted in your budget. 
Put your budget to work. 
Now that your budget is ready covering all expenses and financial goals, make sure you follow 
it and live within it. 
Assess your budget 
If you are not able to live within your budget, you need to limit your spending and rework your 
budget. Be realistic about your spending habits. 
13savings in fixed deposits, mutual funds, or share mark et.
Budgeting may enable you to value your financial health. In case there is any recklessness, which is 
impossible to eradicate, efforts can be made to minimise its influence. At the same time budgeting also 
ensures that your money plan grows steadily over a period of time. It generates a sense of financial well-
being as we tend to be less stressed about managing money and are prepared for life's contingencies in 
future. 
MANAGING Y OUR MONEY CHAPTER 3
Ashish working in a company manufacturing surgical equipment received his salary in the form of a 
cheque. He joined this company just about 25 days before. He was told by his company that salary for all its 
employees is given only through cheques and that he has to open a savings bank account in a nearby bank 
to get salary in cash. He was perplexed. Why? Later on, when he applied for a credit card he was told by 
the bank issuing credit card that he has to have a bank account, monthly statement and his financial 
transactions of his account for the previous six months. Why? 
Managing money is an important component of our life. If we study in a school, college or in an institution, 
we need to learn to manage money we get from parents and guardians for paying fees, to buy books and 
stationary or to use as pocket money . As grown-ups, when we work for a firm or running our own firm, we 
need to learn to manage our incomes from our work or profits from our firms. In this chapter we will try to 
answer questions Ashish has raised and suggest him what to do.
 
In our day-to -day life, we manage our money in the form of coins and currencies and deposits with banks; 
we also use cheques, withdraw cash from automated telling machines (ATMs) using debit cards and 
purchase goods using credit cards. In India, besides banks, we also put our money in post offices as well.
14
15Banks are financial institutions which collect funds from the people and place them in financial assets 
such as deposits, loans and bonds rather than in tangible property . We get a variety of services from banks 
ranging from selling gold to work as financial advisors. We get interest on savings we make and we are 
charged interest on loans we get from banks. You can also get similar banking services from post offices 
as well. Even though we do not get a variety of banking services that we get from banks, post offices play a 
very important role in promoting savings habit among people in rural and urban areas and at the same time 
contribute to country's development by meeting its financial requirements. In India, more than 150 banks 
with hundreds of their branches – both in public and in private sectors and nearly 1.5 lakh post offices play 
crucial role in managing our money .
We will learn some important banking services provided by banks and post offices such as (i) savings 
account; (ii) current account; (iii) fixed deposit and (iv) recurring deposit and support services such as (a) 
cheque book facilities; (b) ATM cum- debit cards; (c) financing credit cards (d) money transfer and the 
Internet and mobile banking facilities.
Savings Account 
We can use this facility to save a part of our current incomes to meet our future needs and also intend to 
earn an income from our savings. Banks offer a reasonable rate of interest for our savings but impose 
restrictions on the savings account. From our savings account, we cannot withdraw beyond the 
stipulated amount within a given period. The number of withdrawals in a month or a day is also restricted. 
In savings accounts, we need to deposit a minimum amount in the beginning and also retain certain 
minimum amount with the bank. This amount varies if we want to avail other facilities such as cheque 
books. 
Requirements for opening an account in a bank 
Most banks in India require one of the following documents for opening an account. 
Photo Identity: (i) Passport; (ii) Permanent Account Number (PAN) card; (iii) Voter ID card; (iv) 
Driving licence; (v) Government ID card; (vi) Ration card; or (vii) Senior citizen ID card. 
Address Proof: (i) Passport; (ii) Telephone bill; (iii) Electricity bill; (iv) Bank Statement with 
Cheque; (v) Certificate/ ID card issued by post office. 
Even though most banks insist on any of the above documents, you can also submit other 
identification proof which can satisfy the bank. When you visit the bank for opening an 
account, you need to produce before the bank only the original document(s) for verification 
along with a photocopy of each document. 
Source: www .icici.com 
Banks impose service charges on savings accounts when (i) minimum balance is not maintained and (ii) 
the number of withdrawals and amount of withdrawals exceed the stipulated limit. Banks also have the 
discretion to waive these service charges to a few customers on certain grounds.
The rate of interest payable by the banks on deposits maintained in savings account is prescribed by the 
Reserve Bank of India. However , a few banks are authorized to give an additional interest of ¼ or ½ per 
cent. At present, most banks including post offices pay about 3.5% as interest for savings account 
deposits. The rate of interest is paid irrespective of whether cheque book facility is availed by the account 
holder or not. Interest is paid on savings account to encourage people even with moderate incomes to 
save through banks and post offices. Now-a- days, in rural areas work ers engaged in unorganised sector 
jobs such as works available under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 and 
those working in private sector are encouraged to open savings account in banks and post offices. If you 
are a farmer , banks encourage you to open savings account and avail various banking services. 
Discuss 
Renuka and her husband sell vegetables on the roadside. They are able to save about ` 400 per 
day after meeting all the expenses of running the vegetable shop. They wish to put their 
savings either in post office or bank. Which one they can choose and why? 
Post offices and a few banks issue passbooks containing our transactions with the bank. A few others 
such as ICICI do not have this option but keep their customers updated by sending a monthly statement. 
Some banks also give their phone numbers so that we can call over phone to know our transactions.
While there is no limit imposed by banks to deposit our savings, we can only save up to a certain amount in 
post office savings account. Individuals can save only up to ` 1 lakh. If the savings account is opened by 
more than one person, also known as joint account, you can save up to ` 2 lakh only. Income earned as 
interest is taxable in banks' savings account, no tax is charged on the interest received from post office 
savings account. In order to attract customers of different income groups, banks and post offices offer a 
variety of savings account facilities. 
Minor Account 
A child account is similar to regular savings account. However , it is opened under a minor 
saving account The account includes a free passbook, a debit card on the permission of a 
parent, facility to transfer money from parents' account, cheque book and the Internet banking 
access. There is usually an additional balance account that parents must maintain for a child's 
account. Such accounts instill financial discipline in a child by familiarizing him to the banking 
world. 
Children like Julie then are introduced to the fundamentals of banking transactions and 
facilities, such as debit cards, cheque books, fund transfers, withdrawal and deposits of 
money . Her parents are enabling her to decide on expenses and savings with an account. The 
account is opened in the name of Julie but her parents hold the transaction rights. The parents 
cannot use the account for depositing cheques received in their name. Julie is now introduced 
to the excitement and decision making skills imparted through the study of financial literacy . 
However , in the absence of such course, a child needs the support of her parents to understand 
the implications of spending and saving . A stark reminder of financial indiscipline is the 
increasing chances of account being inactive when not used for a year. A child will not learn 
unless parents spend time with her. 
At the same time child's account is aimed at infusing financial rigour . In case of misuse, the 
parents need to be strict with the expense. For example, one can deposit ` 5000 at the 
16
beginning of any month as a pock et money for let's say five months. In case she spends the 
entire money she will not get any compensation for the coming four months. In case of 
resistance the parents may give him nominal ` 300 to 500 per month. The amount can then be 
deducted after four months from his pocket money . In this way parents need to inculcate some 
discipline in the child. 
Debit card is generally discouraged for a child unless coached about its use. Children are 
provided a separate login ID and password from the Internet banking . The cost related to child's 
account is the same as that of an adult. Bank charges are levied for transactions that exceed 
the limit. Banks do not waive off penalties because it is a child's account. Private banks charge 
` 250-300 for violating the minimum balance requirements.
 
Source: The Economic Times 
Current Account 
It is another kind of account facility generally maintained by entrepreneurs, companies, institutions, 
government and private offices. By opening current account, we can do numerous financial transactions 
every day. Normally , money is withdrawn or payments are made through cheques. There is no restriction 
on the number and the amount of withdrawals from a current account. There are no interest payments for 
money kept in current account. Generally , banks do not collect any service charge for maintaining current 
accounts. Most banks do not provide any interest for current accounts. Current account carries certain 
privileges which are not given to a savings bank account holder . For example, (i) third party cheques 1 and 
cheques with endorsements can be deposited in the current account for collection and credit; (ii) overdraft 
facilities – you can issue cheque to make payments even if you do not have money in your account at the 
time of issuing cheques. The loans and advances made by the banks to their customers are not given in the 
form of cash but through current accounts. In this way, current accounts earn some interest on all the 
types of advances made by the banker. 
Do you know? 
Suppose you opened an account and deposit some amount and did not use for long time, say, 
for more than 10 years, what will happen? 
Such accounts are known as non-operative accounts whose money is transferred to the bank's 
suspense account. The banks are required to issue notices to account holders to take back the 
money along with the interest. Banks are required to mak e all efforts to locate the customer 
and in case, it fails to find the person, the bank should contact the person who introduced the 
account holder . If the balance in such non-operative account is below the prescribed minimum 
amount and banks can recover the charges periodically and close the account. 
1 Cheques drawn in favour of persons or entities other than the bank and the account holder .  Fixed Deposit Facilities 
In fixed deposit accounts, we can deposit a specific amount for a specific period ranging from 15 days to 
10 years. The longer the period we keep our money , higher will be the interest we get. The amount we 
deposit can be withdrawn only at the end of the specified period. However , if we need money , we can take 
a loan against our fixed deposit by paying interest. 
17
18Like banks, post offices also offer a variety of fixed deposit facilities with attractive interest rates and 
advantages. Any individual or two adults can jointly open the account. The minimum amount you can put 
in fixed deposit is ` 200. The duration of fixed deposit is 1, 2, 3, and 5 years and the rates of interest are 
6.25%, 6.50%, 7.25%, 7.5%. The amount you earn from interest payments is compounded quarterly for 1, 
2, 3 and 5 years. Unlik e savings account in which you cannot save beyond a limit, post office fixed 
deposits allow to save as much as possible. People who save in post office fixed deposit account also 
need not have to pay taxes for the amount they deposit  .  Suppose you have opened a fixed deposit 
account for either 2, 3, or 5 years, you need to wait at least one year to complete.
 
Post offices also offer an account facility called Post Office Monthly Income Account which ensures a 
regular monthly income. In this scheme, a maturity period (6 years) is fixed. Suppose you deposit ` 12, 
000 with the post office, you will get ` 80 per month to your savings account. Rate of interest for such an 
account is 8% per annum. However , you can deposit only a fixed amount. For example, if you are an 
individual, you can deposit ` 4.5 lakh and the maximum limit for joint account of two adult persons is ` 9 
lakh. If you want your deposits back for some emergency purposes or for putting into some other forms of 
investment, you may withdraw the amount after a certain period. In such cases, post offices deduct one or 
two per cent of your deposits and allow you to close your account prematurely .
Facilities for Senior Citizens 
By now we are aware that rate of interest is an important consideration for people to deposit their incomes 
or savings. Post offices offer a deposit facility in which retired persons or persons aged 55 and above who 
are willing to deposit their savings and pension and other social security benefits for a specific period and 
wish to earn a high rate of interest regularly . Known as Senior Citizens Savings Scheme, this deposit 
account facility allows old age people either individually (aged 55 and above) or with their spouse to 
deposit up to ` 15 lakh. The rate of interest for this account facility is around 9 per cent with the maturity 
period of 5 years. As in the case of other fixed deposit accounts, you can also close your accounts 
prematurely but the post offices will charge 1 or 1.5 per cent interest. These account holders need not 
have to pay taxes for the amount they save but will be required to pay a very small amount for the interest 
they earn. Suppose you have savings account facility in the same post office where you have deposited, 
you can convert your interest automatically to get credited to your savings account. You can also convert 
your savings you earn through your fixed deposit to recurring deposit so your income from savings rises. 
In this way, people save, put their money in post office in fixed deposits and earn rate of interest of 
around10.5% per annum as well.
Read the following table showing interest rates paid by two large banks in India (with effect from October 
2010) for fixed deposits and answer the questions given below . 2
2 Benefits of Section 80C of the Income T ax Act, 1961.  Bank 1 – a public sector bank Bank 2 – a private sector bank 
Maturity P eriod Interest
Rate 
GeneralMaturity P eriod Bank 1 – a public sector bank 
Interest R ate 
Senior
citizens 
15 days to 90 days 3.75 4.00 7 days to 45 days 4.25 
91 days to 180 days 5.50 61 to 90 days 4.25 4.75 
181 days to less than 1 year 91 to 184 days 6.00 5.75 6.25 General
1 year to 554 days 7.00 185 days to 269 days 6.25 6.75 
555 days 7.50 270 days to less than 1 year 6.50 7.00
556 days to less than 2 years 1 year to 389 days & 591
days to less than 2 years 7.25 6.75   7.25 
2 years to 999 days 7.50 390 days 7.25 7.75 
1000 days 7.75 790 days 8.25 
1001 days to less than 5 years 590 days, 2 years to 780 days,
791- 989 days & 991 days
to less than 3 years 7.25 7.50 8.00 
5 years to less than 8 years 7.50 990 days, 3 years up to
10 years 8.00 8.50 
8 years and up to 10 years 7.75 
Questions 
(I)  Ram Prakash, a student of class X has been asked to advise his grandfather aged 65 to select a bank to 
put his savings for 3 years. Which bank can he choose and why? 
(ii) Ajit working as a sales executive in Ahmedabad likes to deposit his savings for not more than 5 years. 
Suppose he deposits ` 1.7 lakh, in one of the banks. Find out the differences in the interest he will get at 
the end of the maturity period. 
Sweep Accounts: Mak e your idle cash earn more 
Your deposit in savings account (SB) gives only a small return but is highly liquid whereas the 
fixed deposits (FD) earn relatively a higher return but are not liquid. In recent times, banks offer 
a deposit option combining the positive sides of both deposit facilities. Referred to as sweep, 
auto-sweep, flexi deposit or some hybrid scheme (for example, SBI has named as Savings 
Plus), this facility allows you to link your SB account to a FD. 
Sweep accounts allow you to transfer some amount kept in savings account to fixed deposit, 
known as sweep -out. Sweep -in facility allows you to shift the required amount from FD to the SB 
account. Any amount that exceeds the pre-set threshold in a SB account is automatically 
transferred to the FD account, earning you a higher interest. If you need to withdraw some money 
that is more than the threshold limit, the required amount gets swept into your SB account. This 
arrangement eliminates the need to break the fixed deposit and you lose interest only on the 
amount that is actually used. Sweep accounts also do away with the need to keep a large sum in 
the savings account for liquidity which would earn only a small interest. 
Source: The Economic Times Wealth 
Recurring Deposit Facilities 
There are other ways people save their money . For example, roadside vendors selling flowers, vegetables, 
fruits and all such things cannot save a large amount. Banks and post offices also have a provision for 
19
20opening account facilities for such people. They can save a fixed amount every day, week or month for a 
fixed period. This is called recurring deposit. The interest we get in this account is relatively higher than 
what we get from savings account facilities.
One important recurring deposit facility available in post offices is 5-Year Post Office Recurring Deposit 
Account. Any individual or two adults jointly can open this account. We can deposit minimum of `. 10 per 
month (and the multiples of 5 and thereafter). In case we are not able to pay for a month, we can pay within 
two months. In these five years the account holder is excused four times for defaults of payment of 
instalment. We can also partly withdraw our savings (about 50% of the balance after one year). About 
7.5% is paid as interest every three months. In case we get some additional income and wish to deposit in 
this account, we can also get a rebate.
Using Cheque Book Facilities 
When we deposit money in our account in a bank, we can withdraw money from our account in many 
ways. We need to visit the bank and fill in the withdrawal form in which we can fill the details of our 
account and put our signature and submit along with the passbook to the bank. Bank deducts the amount 
we wanted from our account and will give us cash. The other way is to use cheques issued by the bank 
and withdraw money from your account or make payments.
Minimum Balance 
In order to use cheques, we need to maintain a minimum balance in our account. This amount varies with 
locations we reside and banks. A few banks also provide cheque book facility with zero balance in the 
account as well. People maintain accounts with cheque book facility so that they do not have to carry 
much cash when making purchases.
Payment of Bills 
Another advantage of cheque book facility is that if we want to send money to someone, it is safe to send 
the cheque rather than cash. Banks deal with account with cheque book facility in the following way:
Suppose you pay a telephone bill of ` 1500 to MTNL / BSNL by issuing a cheque. The MTNL/BSNL sends 
your cheque to the bank it has an account with. The bank electronically increases MTNL/BSNL account 
balance by ` 1500. At the same time, the bank reduces your account balance by ` 1500 if your account 
(with cheque book facility) is at that bank, or electronically signals to the bank where your account is to 
reduce your balance by ` 1500. When we get a confirmation from MTNL / BSNL about our payment, this 
also means the cheque we issued got cleared.
 
Suppose you do not have sufficient balance in your account, the bank will not honour your cheque and the 
MTNL / BSNL will return the cheque to you. This is called dishonour of cheque by the bank. As per the bank 
laws in India, you will be penalised for issuing cheque without having sufficient balance. 
Keeping track of our money 
One precaution we need to tak e while making payments through cheque is to record the amount in our 
cheque book so that we can always come to know how much money is left in our account. We can also 
check our balance through the Internet or as shown by the ATM. By keeping track of our account balance, 
we can make sure that the cheque does not bounce back. When our cheques bounce, we also lose 
credibility , even if we make payment without looking at our account balance unintentionally . 
Updating Your Pass Book 
Account holders look at their bank passbook to know their financial transactions and to know the balance 
amount. Since most banks in India have been computerized, when we ask bankers to record our 
transaction, they use printers and provide update of our transactions. Some banks send monthly 
statement containing our transactions. Whenever we engage in a financial transaction, particularly while 
making payments through cheques, we need to check with our cheque book transactions and mark off 
cleared cheques. 
Let's do some calculation for knowing account balance. 
Last month Kavita had a cheque book savings account with a balance of ` 5000. This month, 
she received her salary of ` 7000 to her account. She made payments through cheques 
totalling ` 7500 and all the cheques got cleared. She did not withdraw any funds from her 
account. Calculate her balance for this month. 
` 5000 
+ ` 7000 
- ` 7500 
= ` 4500 Solution: 
Last month's balance 
+ Deposits 
- Cheques that cleared 
New balance 
We need to be careful while looking at the monthly statement to determine our bank balance. Suppose in a 
month you had no financial transaction in your account, the balance from your monthly statement should 
be the same as the balance on your passbook as long as all the cheques you issued got cleared. But if 
some cheques have not yet been cleared, the balance on your monthly statement will exceed the balance 
on your account by the amount of the cheques that have not yet been cleared. If you issue more cheques, 
you will land up in negative balance and cheque bouncing problem.
Clearing of Cheques 
When we issue a cheque, our balance is not reduced until the time the cheque is cleared. The time 
between issuing a cheque until the money deducted from our account balance is referred to as the cheque 
float. This float is due to the time it takes for the bank where the cheque was deposited to contact your 
bank. Sometimes postal / courier delays also lead to delay in making payments. Earlier it used to take 3-15 
days for clearing outstation cheques. Suppose you send a cheque from Kolkata to buy a book in Chennai 
from a book publisher , cheques and requisition form reach Chennai which would take 2-3 days and the 
cheque has to be deposited to the service branch of your bank in Chennai. All the transactions used to take 
10-15 days. Now-a- days, due to the Internet and improvement in electronic communication, the float 
period has been reduced considerably to a few days particularly in cities. The local cheques in these cities 
– cheques issued for making payments within the same city get cleared even within a day also.
Post offices also issue cheque book facility provided we maintain ` 500, a minimum balance you need to 
keep in the account for using such facilities. 
Bank to Bank Clearance Facilities 
One limitation of cheque facility is that suppose you issue a cheque to your sister studying in a faraway 
place, your sister has to deposit your cheque in the bank she has account and the bank will take a few days 
to transfer money from your account to her account. Even if you issue a cheque for somebody residing in 
your town or city, that person has to contact your bank to encash or will have to deposit in a bank and will 
have to wait till your money is transferred to his or her account. Cheques cannot be used as money . 
Suppose you are issued a cheque, you need to encash within six months from the issue date. Banks such 
21
22as State Bank of India has also introduced a new facility called multicity cheques (see box) to attract 
customers to use cheque book facilities. 
Multi- City Cheque 
A multi- city cheque (MCC) is one that can be written by the customer in favour of his client and is 
payable at par at all branches of the bank. MCC can be issued in cheque operated accounts (SB and 
current), in addition to normal cheque books. The MCC facility is to be used only for genuine 
transactions / bona fide remittances. No cash payments will be made to third parties at other 
branches. The upper limit for issue of MCCs is ` 2 lakh. The issue charges for MCC are ` 3 per 
cheque leaf and will be debited from the account at the time of issue of the cheque book. There are 
no transaction charges. 
Source:  www .statebank ofindia.com. 
Automated Teller Machines (ATM Cum-Debit Cards 
Banks also provide their customers digitally made plastic cards popularly known as ATM-cum- debit cards 
for withdrawing cash from ATMs located in numerous convenient locations in the country . By using ATM 
card and entering the personal identification number (PIN), banks allow the ATM card holders to withdraw 
cash 24 hours a day, any day of the year. Banks issue ATM cards with a PIN. Banks suggest changing PIN 
frequently so that your card cannot be misused by other persons.
Banks also collaborate with other banks and credit card companies so that we can withdraw cash from 
ATMs of collaborating financial institutions or purchase goods and services using ATM cards. However , a 
limit on the total amount withdrawn in a day has been imposed. For example, in most ATMs in India, we 
can withdraw upto `. 10, 000 at a time. Also in a day, we can withdraw not more than ` 45,000. In case we 
wish to withdraw from ATMs other than your bank, we can withdraw ` 45, 000 in a day and up to 5 times 
in a month. A service charge is collected for every extra withdrawal from other ATMs. Duplicate ATM 
cards are also provided if we lose our ATM card.
Credit Cards 
Credit cards are also one instrument through which credit card companies allow us to purchase goods and 
services on credit and pay in a stipulated time period, with or without interest payments. The time period 
and the interest vary with company . The most popular credit cards available in India are Master Card, 
Maestro and Visa.
How does a Credit Card Work? 
In India, credit cards are mostly issued by banks and credit card companies. These cards are accepted by 
most business outlets. Banks honour transactions made on the credit cards. Credit card companies 
receive a percentage (commonly between 2-4 per cent) of the payments made to business outlets with 
their credit cards. For example, if you buy a colour television in a shop using Master Card and paid `10,000 
in a retail shop, that retail shop will pay Master Card a percentage, about ` 200. Even though most retail 
shops accept credit cards, some shops require this 2 per cent to be paid by customers as they do not wish 
to incur this cost.
Banks collaborating with credit card companies, issue credit cards, send bills to credit card holders and 
finance when necessary . They provide financing facilities for credit card holders who choose to pay their 
balance in full when they receive a monthly statement. Banks benefit by providing financing facilities so 
that they could earn a high rate of interest on the credit extended. This is also one of the reasons why 
people do not use credit cards for purchases involving a large amount of money such as buying a house, 
car and so on. 
Monthly Statement 
We will receive a monthly statement in which the details of previous balance, purchases they made with 
the credit card during that period, cash advances, payments made, finance charge, new balance and the 
minimum amount we need to pay before the due date. The statement also shows the method of 
calculating interest rate or finance charge and the detail of various services and charges.
How to Apply for a Credit Card 
When we apply for a credit card, banks require information to assess our ability to repay credit such as our 
monthly income, monthly expenditure, past history of borrowing and savings and the details of our assets. 
They expect positive details of all information. However , banks issue credit cards even if some 
requirements are not satisfactory . For example, for people working in the unorganised sector – working in 
private companies, banks extend a limited credit limit and issue credit cards. Some banks require the 
details of income and existing debt level to assess the existing debt level as a percentage of income. If 
your debt is only a small fraction of your income, banks provide credit cards. Some banks also extend 
credit at higher interest rates to individuals who they think have a higher risk of defaulting .
Credit card Debt trap 
People usually don't understand a credit card statement. They wrongly interpret the minimum amount 
due, taking for granted that they have to pay 5% of the due amount. They never check that the company 
charges exorbitant interest on the remaining amount. It is advisable to use credit cards while travelling but 
one should remember to pay off the amount on the due date. When this is not done there is a danger of 
falling into a debt trap, especially when people use multiple credit cards and the revolving credit facility . 
Last payment charge Card Purchase 
Interest rate 
Kotak T rump Gold card 41.79% ` 300-600 
Citibank Indian Oil
Gold card 41.69% ` 300 for up to ` 10,000, 
` 600 later 
ICICI Bank Ebony
Credit card Grace P eriod 
Up to 48 days 
Up to 55 days 
Up to 50 days 41.69% 30% of minimum amount due Use Credit Cards with Caution 
Axis Bank Gold Plus card Up to 50 days 39% ` 250-500 
SBI gold credit card Up to 50 days 41.80% ` 100 for  ` 501-100 
` 350 for Rs 1001-10,000 
Source:  apnapaisa.com 
Specialised Credit Cards 
Some companies issue credit cards for making purchases in their shops located within India and 
worldwide. For example, Petro Cards are issued by Indian Oil Corporation, a public sector company to buy 
23
24petroleum products from its company outlets. Such retail cards are popularly used in developed countries. 
One disadvantage of these retail cards is that you cannot buy any other materials from other shops which 
make the general credit cards attractive. Credit cards are also of different types. Some cards known as 
gold cards or platinum cards provide extra benefit to card holders covering insurance. You will receive 
upgrade to a gold or platinum card if you prove that you are creditworthy by making more and more 
purchases and make your credit card payments on time.
Credit Limit 
Banks issuing credit cards set a credit limit which specifies the maximum amount of credit allowed. This 
limit varies with individuals and is determined by the banks on the basis of creditworthiness of persons 
applying for credit card. Credit card providers also allow us to make purchase beyond our stated credit 
limit. This help in preventing situations in which we try to use credit card, but rejected as our maximum 
credit limit has reached. A separate fee is charged for such purchases. A similar fine is levied if we buy 
above the credit limit and without availing overdraft protection.
Free Credit Period 
Whenever we make our payments through credit card, credit card companies allow a free credit period in 
which we are not charged any interest on our purchases. The free credit period is usually about 20-50 days 
from the time the credit card statement is "closed" (any purchases after this date are put on the next 
month's bill) and the time the bill is due. This shows that credit cards provide us with free credit from the 
time we made the purchase and the bill is due. However , credit card providers such as SBI allow using the 
interest free credit period only on retail purchases and if previous month's outstanding balance is paid in 
full.
Credit Card Charges 
The interest that credit card holders must pay for using credit is called finance charge. It is generally 
calculated by the simple interest rate on monthly basis and annualised. For example, SBI card Finance 
Charges for an ordinary credit card is 3.35% p.m. (40.2% p.a.). Purchases after the monthly statement 
closing date are not normally considered when determining the finance charge because of the free credit 
period, as they will appear on our next monthly statement. The finance charge applies only to balances 
that were not paid in full before their due date in the current billing period. Credit card companies charge an 
annual fee for using their cards. However , some companies waive this fee depends on a variety of factors. 
Other Schemes 
Credit card companies float various schemes to attract people to use their credit cards and on occasions 
they also waive annual fee. Some companies also offer bonus to card holders by awarding points for each 
purchase. If credit card holders accumulate a specific number of points, they are offered schemes like free 
travel to tourist locations and so on. Credit card providers also make a tie up with many business firms and 
encourage credit card holders to buy goods and services at a discount rate. 
Some banks also allow us to withdraw a limited amount of cash using credit card through ATMs. There is 
no free credit period and the interest rate is very high. For example, in SBI cards, if a person has credit limit 
of say ` 45, 000, the cash limit (as part of credit limit) is ` 18, 000. Out of this cash limit, one can withdraw 
about ` 12, 000 and `15, 000 for gold and platinum cards in a day. A fee called cash advance fee or 2.5 per 
cent of money if withdrawn from SBI ATMs or ` 300 is charged. The interest charged on cash advances in 
SBI cards is 3.35% per month (40.2% p.a.).
 
High Interest Rate if Payment is Postponed 
People also use credit cards as a means of financing their purchases. This means, we can pay only a 
portion of the credit card bill at the end of the month and the bank extends credit for the remaining period, 
but with interest. You can inform credit card providers that you wish to pay on monthly basis (EMI). 
Interest rate charged on credit is relatively high and ranges between 18% to 24% depending on the credit 
card provider and is calculated on an annualised basis and does not vary much over time. Although it is a 
convenient way of making payments for those who cannot mak e payments at one time, it is expensive 
and should be avoided if possible. 
Using credit cards – some precautions 
(i) When we receive the monthly statement, we need to verify it carefully . There may be some 
arithmetic error, double charge for a purchase, or an incorrect amount on a purchase. Sometimes a 
wrong entry might have been included. For example, when you were issued the credit card, you 
were promised that there would be no annual fee. However , after 2-3 years of use, you may find a 
monthly statement having included the annual fee in your account. In such cases, we need to 
immediately contact the bank or credit card company about the new charges debited to your 
account. Credit card providers also specify duration say, 15 days (SBI card) and locations for 
jurisdiction for settling our disputes as required by our consumer protection laws. 
(ii) Due to aggressive mark eting strategies, we tend to acquire too many credit cards from different 
credit card providers. This can complicate record keeping and increase the probability of losing one 
or more credit cards. It is better to use only one credit card to cover your purchases. In that case, we 
need to (i) ensure whether the credit card is acceptable to shops in which you use credit card most. 
MasterCard, Maestro and Visa are accepted by most shops; (ii) look for credit card that does not 
charge an annual fee and (iii) examine the interest rate / finance charges and other fees and choose a 
suitable credit card which has low charges and fees. Sometimes, credit card providers charge a very 
low interest but charge a high annual fee and other charges (for cash advances, late payment, 
service taxes, changes in the finance charges when late payments are made, fee for accessing 
credit beyond the maximum limit). Customers need to be cautioned of these hidden costs which the 
companies do not reveal to them.
(iii) You need to do some basic arithmetic before choosing a credit card. Sometimes, credit card holders 
also specify that the low fee or charges are only for a short duration. You need to ask them the details 
of duration.
(iv) The details of free interest period and whether such period is available for cash advances also are to 
be explored. 
(v) Use credit card only if you are sure to cover the payment before the end of free interest duration on or 
before the due date. 
(vi) Determine the maximum amount of credit you may require each month only after deducting for all 
your expenditure as well as a specific amount of savings. Activity
You plan to apply for a credit card A because it has no annual fee, while credit card B has an 
annual fee of ` 3000. You typically have an outstanding credit balance ` 10,000 each month. 
Credit card A charges an annual interest of 40 per cent on balances carried forward, while 
credit card B charges an interest rate 30 per cent on balances carried forward. Which credit 
card you will choose and why? 
25
26(vii) Avoid carrying a balance on your credit cards when you have money . You will not believe that the 
amount of interest you will earn on any other investment (keeping in savings bank account or invest 
in term deposits) would always be lower than interest payments you are making for credit cards. It 
may not be over exaggeration if we say that use savings if necessary to pay the credit card bills on or 
before the due date. 
(viii) If you are not able to avoid using credit cards, prioritise yourself that you pay the minimum amount 
you need to pay on due date. If possible, try to avail low interest loan facilities to pay the credit card 
debts because the credit card companies levy a variety of charges in such a manner that you will be 
forced to pay a huge amount in the end. 
(ix) Use ATM-cum- debit cards as they offer the same convenience of not holding cash but also will put a 
hold on your spending habits.
Using Money Transfer Facilities
Banking 
Banks provide various money transfer facilities. Customers conventionally use banks for making 
payments through cheques and drafts facilities. Suppose you are residing in Chandigarh and have to send 
`10,000 to your friend in Bangalore. You can go to a bank in Chandigarh, hand over ` 10,000 with a small 
commission and ask for a bank draft on another bank in Bangalore. The Chandigarh bank writes a draft in 
favour of your friend in Bangalore directing the bank in Chandigarh to pay him the amount on demand. You 
can take the draft issued by the bank and post it to your friend in Bangalore. On receipt of it, your friend can 
submit the draft in the bank in which he has an account. He gets ` 10,000 deposited in his account. 
Similarly , money can also be transferred from one country to another .
Core banking transfer 
It is another advance facility offered by banks. Suppose you wish to send / transfer money to your uncle 
having an account in another branch either within the town or city or elsewhere, you can pay the amount in 
the nearby bank / issue a cheque and request the bank to transfer the money to your uncle. Within a few 
minutes, your money gets transferred electronically . Some banks charge a small amount for this service 
and others charge only for large amounts. For example, State Bank of India allows us to transfer about `. 
50,000 without any service charges on a day. 
Other Services 
People also use draft facilities to pay for various services provided by organisations or for paying 
institutional fees. Suppose you wish to apply for government job or for taking admission to a course 
offered by colleges and universities run by governments, people pay the required amount to the bank and 
get drafts and apply . When you apply for a draft for paying outside the city or town you are residing , it is 
called draft. For making payments within the city, banks issue banker's cheques. Similar services are also 
offered by post offices also. It is known as postal orders. Suppose you want to apply for a job in a central 
government office, you can ask for postal orders for the specific amount. Post offices have a printed postal 
order for specific amount. You can retain the counterfoil and send the postal order along with application 
form.
Post Office 
Post offices also offer similar services. You are aware that you can send your money through money order . 
One advantage of money order is that you do not need to post anything as in the case of drafts. Post offices 
take the responsibility of paying the money to the payee and also the message you wish to pass on. These 
days, post offices allow us to know the status of money orders that we sent through telephone and the 
Internet facilities. However , the service charge for money order is relatively higher than the bank drafts. At 
present, post offices charge ` 5 for every ` 100 as money order charges (see Box for the details of service 
charges for bank drafts). One suggestion is that for making large payments beyond ` 1000, we should use 
draft facilities and for lesser amounts we can use money order facilities. 
Internet and Mobile Banking 
Going to post offices and banks and requesting their banking services to send or transfer money generally 
require sufficient time. Technological advancements provide a lot of options today . One latest option is the 
Internet banking . Suppose you have a savings / current account, you can approach your bank. After 
completing the formalities required by the bank, you will be issued two secret codes – a username and a 
password. Using these details, you can transfer your money or receive money from others electronically 
using computer and the Internet. You can also use this facility to pay your bills. For example, if you wish to 
pay for electricity , you can pay through the Internet banking facilities. The Internet banking allows you to 
check your account balance, view your account, request for a cheque book, drafts, banker's cheques, and 
give instructions to stop cheque payment. We can also give instructions such as request for third party 
transfers, invest and renew term deposits. 
However , you need to take certain precautions while using these facilities. For example, you should not 
divulge the details of username and password to others (see box). Banks provide all such precautions 
when we approach them to avail this facility . Very recently , banks also enable us to use cell phones for 
money transfer and other services. 
Using the Internet Banking: Some P recautions 
1. Access your bank website only by typing the URL in the address bar of your browser . 
2. Do not click on any links in any e-mail message to access the site. 
    Most banks including State Bank of India never send e-mail and embedded links asking you 
to update or verify personal, confidential and security details. NEVER RESPOND to such e-
mails/phone calls/SMS if you receive. 
3. Do not be lured if you receive an e-mail/SMS/phone call promising reward for providing 
your personal information or for updating your account details in the bank website. 
4. Scan your computer regularly with Antivirus to ensure that the system is Virus/T rojan free. 
5. Change your Internet Banking password at periodical intervals. 
6. Always check the last log-in date and time in the post log-in page. 
7. Avoid accessing the Internet banking accounts from cyber cafes or shared Pcs.
Source:  www .statebank ofindia.com 
Protecting your online transactions 
When you are making a payment through the Internet using credit and ATM or debit cards, details like 
name, card number , CVV (card verification value) code, and expiry date are usually asked. All these could 
be misused by persons other than the card holder . To prevent this, the RBI directed in August 2009 that an 
additional level of security be provided for online payments. Visa and MasterCard offer facilities termed 
Verified by Visa (VBV) and Secure Code respectively . This can be done when you use your card to make 
online payment by contacting the registered merchant establishments. The list of member -
establishments is available at / verified or .
In India, for many of us, we may tend to feel that we do not have the choice of selecting a financial 
institution. By now you are aware that banks and post offices offer a variety of banking services and you www .visa-asia.com www .mastercard.com/securecode
27
28have a choice depending on the amount of money you earn, spend and save. Three important issues you 
may consider before making a choice of financial institution.
The financial institution should be located close to your residence or workplace. You also have to see its 
ATM network. It should provide all the banking services you require in the long and short term. Sometimes, 
you may not have the Internet facilities. You need to see whether you are able to do most financial 
transactions without modern gadgets such as computers and the Internet.
You are aware that interest rates offered on deposits vary with banks. Depending on your financial 
position, you will have to do some arithmetic to estimate your income earned from interest rates. You may 
also need to borrow from your financial institution. You have to see whether they provide loans to their 
customers with low interest or not.
Many banks do not operate physical branches all over the city. They may deal mostly with ATM counters 
and through the Internet. They may also tend to pay a higher interest rate on deposits than institutions 
with physical branches because they have lower expenses and can afford to pay higher deposit rates. We 
must weigh the trade -off between high deposit rates and other facilities at these financial institutions. 
Banks and post offices charge fees for various services. For example, if you issue cheques beyond the 
free-limit, you will have to pay a fee for additional cheques issued. Similarly , commission for making 
demand drafts and core transfers also vary with banks. Choose the one which charges you a low fee. 
We need to read all the instructions given when we deal with a banking service, whether it is with credit 
card, ATM card, or any other deposits. Reading the instructions carefully and enquiring from the staff of 
financial institutions can help us to understand and benefits of their services better . 
Websites 
www .statebank ofindia.com 
www .indiaposts.in 
www .icici.com 
www .rbi.org .in 
29CHAPTER 4
Personal assets represent items of utility or comfort which people purchase, as they earn, usually over 
their lifetime. They are different from items of daily use such as food items, cosmetics, clothes, etc., 
because they usually last for a much longer period of time, and the owner does not have to replace them 
frequently . The same is not the case with items like a toothbrush, or a t-shirt – they wear out soon. 
However , personal assets also tend to be much more expensive than items of daily use – good examples 
of such are a house, a piece of land, a car, an expensive computer , etc. The purchaser of personal assets 
may need to seek financial help to arrange money to complete the purchase. We will discuss the types of 
financial help available to people to complete the purchase of various types of personal assets. 
Loan 
If you plan to buy an asset, you may seek a loan from a bank or a financial institution (called 'lenders') 
against the security of the asset. The loan is provided at the time of purchase and it can be repaid over a 
period of time through instalments. The security of the assets means that the lender can seize the asset in 
case you fail to pay the loan back, either partly or completely – this is called 'default'. In case of you 
'defaulting', the lender can retrieve the lent money by selling the asset. FINANCING ASSETS 
30Applying for a loan 
While applying for a loan, you need to provide information about your personal financial position to the 
lender to show your ability to repay the loan. Your personal financial position means a record of the assets 
you already own, the debts you owe to other people or lenders, and your monthly/ annual income and 
expenses. A loan contract is made between you and the lender which specifies the amount of loan, the 
rate of interest, the repayment schedule, maturity time and the collateral (security of an asset to back the 
loan). Mostly , the asset to be purchased serves as security to the lender . If you buy a house on loan, and do 
not repay the loan, the lender can seize the house and sell it to recover the money lent to you. 
Repayment of loan 
EMIs or Equated Monthly Instalments are used, in most cases, to repay loans taken to finance personal 
assets. EMIs are calculated in such a manner that the same amount is payable by the borrower to the 
lender every month over the tenure of the loan, and by the time the last EMI is made, the entire loan amount 
is repaid. The critical thing about understanding EMIs is that this amount captures both the repayment of 
the loan principal, as well as the loan interest. 
Managing your personal finances well is the key to leading a secure life. You must always correctly 
estimate the amount of assets you can purchase, and also keep a check on your expenses. Losing track of 
these and over-estimating your purchasing capacity , say by taking a loan, for which EMI payments are 
more than what you can bear, could lead you into financial troubles. 
Education Loan 
Acquisition of any type of asset requires money . If you do not have the entire quantum of funds required to 
obtain the desired asset, you turn to financial institutions, mostly banks, which provide funding in the form 
of loans. Human resources are a part of the social capital of a country . 
Why Education loan? 
Education creates academic and professional skills and knowledge in human beings, thereby creating 
human capital. People use such skills to gain employment and generate income for themselves. Thus, it is 
important that no deserving student is denied education for want of funds. Financial institutions provide 
loans to support education, and development of skills to sustain the social capital of the nation. The 
objective of these loans is to bring education within the reach of students and help them improve their 
future prospects. 
Amount 
The loan amount ranges from ` 1 lakh to 10 lakh. The foremost criteria for obtaining an education loan is 
that one must have secured admission to a general / technical course in India or abroad. It is generally 
provided to people within the age group of 16-26 years.
Composition: What does it include? 
Education loans may cover apart from the tuition fee, a list of other expenses like boarding costs, costs of 
books/stationary , and other ancillary expenses. The entire cost incurred to complete the course is not 
financed by the bank. A certain portion, called margin, has to be paid by the applicant as his own 
contribution. If the loan amount exceeds ` 4 lakh, you are required to pay 5 per cent of the amount as 
margin money . It means if you want a loan of ` 5 lakh, you are required to pay ` 25,000/-, the rest will be 
paid by the bank. 
Processing of loan 
A processing procedure entails submission of the loan application form, along with the mark sheet of the 
last qualifying exam, proof of admission, schedule of expenses during the course period, bank statement 
and details of asset which is not fixed and varies according to the course. A processing fee is usually 
charged by the loan granting institution, which has to be either paid separately by the applicant, or is 
deducted from the amount disbursed as loan. 
Repayment of loan 
The repayment has to begin immediately after the student secures employment or six months post the 
completion of course, whichever is earlier . The repayment tenure is between 5 to 7 years repaying the 
amount (student or co-borrower) can claim a tax deduction on interest paid on this loan under section 80E. 
Case Study 
Rahul needs admission in ABC College which has a total fee of ` 5,00,000 for a 5-year course. His father 
has ` 1,00,000 cash in a fixed deposit account which, if and as required, can be spared for his son's 
admission to the college. However , the balance amount needs to be funded through a loan from a bank. 
Rahul has the option to approach any of the five banks as shown in the table. The choice of bank from 
which Rahul will take loan will depend on the terms and conditions on which the loan is given by each 
bank. These are shown in the table. Major conditions to be noted are:
(I) Rate of interest on loan Education Loan 
Interest rates on education loans in India range from 10-13% per annum, depending on factors 
including the lending bank, loan amount and collateral offered. 
For female students , most banks offer a concession on 5100 basis points in interest rates. 
Repayment has to start 6 months after the completion of the course, whichever is earlier . The 
repayment period ranges from 5-7 years. 
Deduction from income tax payable can be claimed under section 80E on the interest paid. 
Banks can ask for margin money of up to 15% of the loan amount for loans exceeding ` 4 lakh. 
Query
▪ I did my masters from a Spanish university . The university helped me obtain a loan for 
Euro 20,000 from a local bank to help me pay my tuition fees. I have to pay back the 
loan in Euros over four years in quarterly instalments. After the course, I have been 
working in India and transfer money to my loan account in Spain. Can I get any tax 
exemption on this loan repayment? 
Section 80E of Income Tax Act says that the education loan should have been obtained from 
'a financial institution' defined therein. A foreign bank (operating outside of India) does not 
fall under the definition of a financial institution. Hence, you cannot get any exemption under 
the section. 
Source:  The Economic Times, November 24, 2009. 
31
32(ii) Period of repayment (tenure) 
(iii) Own contribution (margin money) needed by the bank from the borrower , and 
(iv) Total equated monthly instalments (EMIs) 
Rahul may calculate the best option available to him on the basis of above terms and conditions and decide 
the bank from which it is profitable to obtain the loan. 
Rate of interest and period of repayment 
First, Rahul will look at the rate of interest and the period of repayment of loan. Usually , if the rate of interest 
is lower and the period of repayment is longer , the cost of the loan is lower . In this particular case, the 
period of repayment of all loans is the same. Hence, this is not a consideration, and Rahul will be guided by 
the rate of interest alone. 
Margin money 
However , in making his choice, Rahul should also consider the fact that he will save money if he is not 
required to give margin money . In case of the Great Bank, savings of Rahul's father will not be used as 
margin money and thus will earn interest on his fixed deposit. This income will reduce the total cost of the 
loan for him. 
Interest lost on fixed deposit 
In case of the Earth Bank which requires margin money , Rahul's father will have to lose his fixed deposit in 
order to pay the margin money . Thus, he will lose interest on the fixed deposit. The total cost of the loan 
should therefore include the interest lost on the fixed deposit in this case. 
Equated monthly instalment 
Rahul will also need to know the amount of EMI before deciding on the loan as the EMI is linked to his 
father's capacity to repay the loan. If the EMI is very high for his father's monthly income, Rahul will find it 
difficult to service the loan over the long term. He will have to choose the loan with lower EMI. 
Thus, the choice of loan to be obtained by Rahul from any bank will depend on all the above considerations.    Earth Bank   Great Bank    Small Bank    Huge Bank     Square Bank
5,00,000 5,00,000 5,00,000 5,00,000
 25,000 50,000 75,000 1,00,000 
 4,00,000  4,75,000  4,50,000 4,25,000
 11.50  12.25  13.00  11.75
5 5 5 5 
 8,797 Bank Name
Total Fee
Own
Contribution 
Loan Amount 
Loan Interest
(%) 
Tenure (years)
EMI 5,00,000 
0     
5,00,000
12.00
 5 
 11,122 10,626 10,239  9,400
Let us do some calculation 
You are planning to buy a laptop which costs ` 1 lakh. Given below is a chart which shows the 
EMI for a loan of ` 1 lakh.
Source:  The Economic Times 
There is a calculator given here to calculate your EMI. If you take a loan of ` 50,000/- for 10 
years at the interest rate of 12%, what will be your EMI?   10 Years 15 Years  20 Years  25 Years   Interest Rate @  5 Years
8% 2,028  1,213  836  772   
10%  2,125  1,322  965  909   
12%  2,224  1,435  1,101  1,053   
15%  2,379  1,613 956  
1,075  
 1,200 
 1,400  1,317  1,28   
Purchasing a Car 
Which car to buy? 
When you decide to purchase a car, the first thing you have to do decide is your budget and make an effort 
to stay within the budget. The next thing is about the size and brand of the car and make a list of the 
selected cars. You have to decide whether you want a petrol car, a diesel or a CNG car. You have to see how 
much total mileage the cars give per litre of petrol. Certain other factors also have to be considered, such 
as insurance charges, repair charges and resale value of the car. These factors differ in case of different 
cars. 
You can find out these details either by newspapers/the Internet or through car dealers directly . You can 
also discuss with your friends and relatives who own the cars which you plan to buy
Negotiating the price 
Some of the car dealers negotiate prices, although this is not common. Also, in course of the negotiation, 
the dealer may offer you free insurance for 1-2 years, free music system and interiors at reduced prices. 
These features are priced at a higher than mark et price to make you feel that you are getting a good deal. 
Car loans 
In most of the cases, the organization you are working with also provides loans to their employees. There 
are a few standard types of car loans available in India. You can choose the one which suits your 
repayment capacity . 
Margin money scheme 
Here the customers are required to pay only the margin amount of money , i.e., 10 or 20 per cent of the total 
cost of the car along with the first instalment of EMI. The balance amount is paid through post- dated 
cheques. This is the most sought after scheme as it has a repayment period of 1-5 years, thus resulting in 
the lowest EMI. 
33
34Security deposit scheme 
The consumers are required to deposit a particular amount of money as security deposit against the 
amount provided as loan. The EMI under this scheme is normally higher than other schemes. However , the 
security deposit also earns an interest and is returned after the maturity of loan to the buyer . 
Hire-purchase scheme 
Under this scheme an agreement is made between the owner of the car (the 'asset') and the user of the car 
for its hiring . The agreement is made in such a way that the hirer of the car has the option of purchasing the 
car in accordance with the terms of the agreement. This scheme is offered by non-banking financial 
institutions. 
Financing plan 
Once you decide a particular car, you should estimate the monthly repayment of the loan you may take to 
finance the car. For example, Anita plans to buy a car. She has shortlisted two cars, one costs 
`5,85,000.00 and the other costs ` 4,75,000.00. She has to decide the amount of down payment and the 
amount of loan. She has to make a comparison between some of the cars shortlisted by her. 
Down P ayment and Loan Amount 
 ` 5,85,000.00 ` 4,75,000.00 
` 1,35,000.00 ` 1,75,000.00 
` 4,50,000.00 ` 3,00,000.00 Car I Car II 
Purchase P rice
Down P ayment (out of savings) 
Loan Amount needed 
Now she can compare between these two cars. After the decision is taken, she has to compare her 
monthly instalments for both the cars. Suppose she gets the car loan at an annual rate of interest of 9 per 
cent, she has to calculate how much monthly payment is required on EMI basis to repay the loan over 3 
years, 4 years or 5 years. For this, she will do the following comparative analysis. 
Monthly Loan P ayments on EMI basis @ 9% rate of interest per annum 
Loan maturity 4,50,000.00 3,00,000.00 
36 months (3 years) 14,310.00 9,540.00 
48 months (4 years) 11,199.00 7,466.00 
60 months (5 years) 9,342.00 6,228.00 Loan Amount ( `) Car II 
Anita notices that the amount of monthly repayment decreases if she extends her loan period. If she 
borrows ` 4,50,000.00, her EMI will be ` 14,310.00 for a three -year loan, ` 11,199.00 for a four-year loan 
and ` 9,342.00 for a five-year loan. The other alternative through which she can reduce her loan amount is 
to borrow a lower amount such as, ` 3,00,000.00. 
35Purchasing a House 
If you plan to buy a house, you have to take into account certain financial considerations: 
Affordability 
It is advisable to be within your purchasing capacity and avoid purchasing a house that is not affordable. 
Financial planners suggest that the price of the house should be not more than double the gross annual 
income of the purchaser . Similarly , the monthly household debt payment (including the loan taken to 
purchase the house) should be no more than about 40 per cent of total monthly gross income.
Insurance 
If you choose to buy insurance on your house, then a bigger and costlier house requires high insurance 
than a smaller one as it costs more to replace parts of the house that are damaged. 
Taxes 
Taxes are imposed on houses to pay for local services like park, school, etc, in the vicinity . The taxes are 
calculated annually and they range between 1-2 per cent of the mark et value of the house. 
Resale value 
Many people buy a house with a plan to sell it after a few years. The resale value depends on the location of 
the house. Y ou can calculate the resale value by knowing the value of similar properties in that location 
that were sold a short while ago. Resale of houses also involves a commission that is usually 2 per cent of 
the selling price and is shared equally by buyers and sellers. 
Price approximation 
On the basis of the above -mentioned considerations, you may shortlist three or four desirable properties 
which match with your preferences. In order to estimate the average price of a house in your preferred 
location, the below mentioned calculation can provide a good guidance: 
Suppose you want to purchase a home with an area of 1,100 sq. ft. You have shortlisted 4 houses of your 
choice in your preferred location, and also have the price and size of each – 
Price per sq. ft ( `) Size (Sq. ft)  Price ( `)
1200
1000
900
80060,00,000
48,00,000
42,30,000
30,00,00060,00,000/1200=5000
48,00,000/1000=4800
42,30,000/900=4700
30,00,000/800=4500
Based on these prices, you can calculate/assess the average price of the house based on the price per 
square feet. This would approximately be ` (5000+4800+4700+4500)/4 =  `4750. Since your 
requirement is for a house having a size of 1,100 sq. ft, its mark et value will be average price per sq. ft 
multiplied with area (in sq. ft) of the house. The estimated price in this case, is ` 4750 x 1100 =  ` 
52,25,000. 
Negotiating a price 
Once you finalise the location and size of the house you want to buy, you need to negotiate the price with a 
seller . You want to make sure that you do not pay more than you need to pay. The seller quotes a certain 
36price of the house, say  ` 58,00,000. You can try to negotiate the price by offering a lower price, i.e.,  ` 
45,00,000, keeping the average price assessed by you as your reference. The seller may accept your offer 
or reject it or may tell you to revise it. After negotiations, the seller may lower the price but you may find it 
still higher than you are prepared to pay. Now, it depends on you whether you accept it, reject it or request 
the seller to further lower it. This goes on until the seller and you come to an agreement. In case you 
negotiate hard and are able to convince the seller , the final price may be agreed at a point somewhere in 
between the average price (assessed by you on the basis of average price) or the price offered by the 
seller . 
Hidden P rice! 
Your dream house may come at a hidden price. Before you work the maths for buying your 
precious house, make sure that you have done enough homework and have sufficient funds to 
pay for 'extra' costs. Apart from the cost of the property in question, which is calculated as 
price per square feet, the cost of the house may actually turn out to be higher . The first 
additional cost the buyer will incur is stamp duty. Since most properties in India are bought 
through home loans, one has to consider the cost of the insurance policy to cover the home 
loan, which may add up to a sizable amount. Further , society charges towards maintenance 
and a yearly property tax are other costs that most buyers do not consider prior to purchase. In 
some of the housing societies, a number of facilities such as swimming pools, gymnasium, 
community centres, landscaped garden also involve all time additional cost. If you are buying a 
resale property you should check about the outstanding registration cost. It is advisable to 
negotiate with the seller and ensure that he bears the registration cost before you buy the 
house. Certain liabilities pass on with the ownership such as electricity and other property tax 
dues. Telephone services too refuse new connections for address where previous bills remain 
unpaid. 
Source:  The Economic Times 
Mortgage Loan 
A mortgage loan, in simple terms, is a loan given to consumers to purchase a house – it allows the lender 
to take possession of the house in case the borrower defaults, and sell it to recover the lent money . A 
mortgage is a legal agreement which assigns the ownership of the house to the bank or lender till the loan 
is fully repaid. Since this legal agreement (or mortgage) is an inherent part of the loan sanctioning 
procedure by banks or lenders, such loans are called mortgage loans. 
In a mortgage loan, usually the bank expects you to cover a portion of the total price with your own money , 
which is known as 'down payment', and is usually 10-20 percent of the total price. Lenders (banks or 
financial institutions) give mortgage loans at different rates of interest. You should obtain a mortgage loan 
that has a low interest rate, as this will help keep the monthly instalments lower than those paid at high 
interest rate mortgage loan. The maturity period of mortgage indicates the duration by the end of which 
you will be required to pay off the loan. Shorter maturity period mortgages loans have higher monthly 
instalments, but also help in reducing the interest paid on the loan and, in turn, the total amount of 
repayment. The benefit of longer duration loans is that you have smaller monthly instalments and you have 
more cash available on hand with you.
If the cost of house of your choice is ` 52,25,000. You make a down payment of the total amount of loan, 
i.e., ` 5,22,500 (10% of the price) out of your own savings. You need a loan of ` 47,02,500 from the bank at 
37the rate of interest of 9.50% per annum. Now you have to take a decision whether you will take the loan for 
a period of 10 years or 20 years. You can make a comparison between the repayment schedule of the short 
and long duration loans. 
20-Year Repayment Schedule 
Timeline EMI No. EMI Interest Principal
1 Month 
2 Years
4 Years
6 Years
8 Years
10 Years
12 Years
14 Years
16 Years
18 Years
20 Years1 
24 
48 
72
96
120
144
168
192
216
24043,833 
43,833
43,833 
43,833
43,833
43,833
43,833
43,833
43,833
43,833
43,83346,95,895 
45,28,665 
43,18,613 
40,64,797 
37,58,100 
33,87,504 
29,39,696 
23,98,589 
17,44,745 
9,54,676 
0 37,228 
35,915
34,265 
32,271
29,862
26,951
23,434
19,184
14,048
7,843
344
58,17,5336,605 
7,919
9,569 
11,562
13,971
16,882
20,399
24,649
29,785
35,991
43,489
47,02,500 Outstanding
Principal 
10-Year Repayment Schedule 
Timeline EMI No. EMI Interest Principal
1 Month
2 Month
1 Year
2 Years
3 Years
4 Years
5 Years
6 Years
7 Years
8 Years
9 Years
10 Years1
2
12
24
36
48
60
72
84 
96
108
12060,849
60,849
60,849
60,849
60,849
60,849
60,849
60,849
60,849
60,849
60,849
60,849.2046,78,879 
46,55,071 
44,06,374 
40,80,857 
37,23,034 
33,29,698 
28,97,324 
24,22,038 
18,99,582 
13,25,272 
6,93,964 
0.00 37,228
37,041
35,088
32,531
29,720
26,631
23,235
19,502
15,398
10,887
5,929
477.94
25,99,40423,621
23,808
25,761
28,318
31,129
34,218
37,614
41,347
45,451
49,962
54,921
60,371.26
47,02,500 Outstanding
Principal 
38Thus, you look at the total repayment schedule, principal as well as interest, for both 10 years and 20 years 
mortgage loans which are as follows: 
Total P rincipal P ayments
Total Interest P ayments
Total P ayments47,02,500
58,17,533
1,05,20,03347,02,500 
25,99,404 
73,01,904 20-Year Mortgage Loan 10-Year Mortgage Loan 
As evident from the above table, you will pay ` 32,18,129 more in interest with 20-year mortgage loan 
than with 10-year mortgage loan. Now the decision is yours, whether you want to pay off loan in 10 years 
and save `  32,18,129 or repay it in 20 years.
Allocation of Repayment between Principal and Interest 
You have taken ` 47,02,500 as loan on 9.5% interest rate. The table below shows how your loan payment 
is allocated between principal and the interest payment each year. You will notice how the initial payments 
are allocated mostly to interest payment with a relatively small amount used to pay off the principal. For 
example, in the second year, the total interest payment is ` 4, 34,975 and the principal amount paid is ` 
91,027. Thus initially most of your payment is needed to cover the interest owed. As time passes, the 
proportion of payment allocated to the principal increases and interest payment decreases. Notice that in 
the 20th year, the total interest payment is ` 26,096 and the principal amount paid is ` 4,99,905.
Allocation of Interest versus Principal per year on ` 47,02,500 at annual interest rate of 9.5% for a 
10 year loan 
Timeline Interest Principal 
1 Year
2 Years
3 Years
4 Years
5 Years
6 Years
7 Years
8 Years
9 Years
10 Years4,43,193
4,34,975
4,25,941
4,16,010
4,05,094
3,93,094
3,79,903
3,65,403
3,49,464
3,31,94382,808 
91,027 
1,00,061 
1,09,992 
1,20,908 
1,32,908 
1,46,099 
1,60,599 
1,76,538 
1,94,059 
394,50,000
4,00,000
3,50,000
3,00,000
2,50,000
2,00,000
1,50,000
1,00,000
50,000
0
1 Year 2 Years 3 Years 4 Years 5 Years  6 Years 7 Years 8 Years 9 Years 10 Years   Interest
Principal
Thus we see that it is not difficult to purchase any asset or enrol for higher education or study abroad as 
there are many options available to pursue your goals of life. You need to be confident of your decisions as 
there are various schemes that can simplify your repayment schedule. 
40CHAPTER 5
You must have heard your parents talking about payment of insurance premiums or seen your friends, 
elder brother or sister applying for an auto insurance. Do you know what this premium is and how it is 
determined? How does insurance actually help? 
Let us assume that there is a colony which has 1000 houses valued at `15,00,000 each. All these owners 
need to protect their property against uncertainties like fire, theft or any other damage to the house. They 
pay a certain amount say `10,000 as premium to an insurance company to protect themselves against any 
loss. The insurance company , thus, pools the amount paid as premium by the owners and assures them 
that it would compensate the house owners in case of any loss by fire, theft etc. The owners benefit by 
such an arrangement as by paying a sum of  `10,000 annually , they are now assured of protection against 
risks or uncertainties since they will be compensated by the insurance company . The insurance company 
will pay the amount from the premiums which it had charged from the owners. 
In case there is fire, the owners who have got their property insured and paid the premium on time will be 
compensated by the insurance company . In this manner , the economic burden is shared by all the house 
owners in the colony . Since all the house owners are contributing premiums, the insurance company is PROTECTION OF ASSETS
41able to pool this premium into a fund or corpus and accordingly when required compensate the owners 
against the loss. The probability that all the houses will be on fire is very remote, hence the insurance 
company also benefits by this agreement and the owners too are assured in exchange for a premium. This 
means if the risk is higher the insurance company will charge a higher premium.
 
There is also a chance that some owners may refuse to contribute to compensate the victim. The insurance 
company then needs to collect funds in advance to meet the loss. This will require some calculations on the 
basis of past experience to estimate the amount of loss. Here, it is presumed that 2 out of 1000 houses may 
burn or bear loss annually . This also means that contributions made by the landowners annually may 
increase to `15,000. The increased sum will meet the cost of loss as well as other expenses incurred in the 
operation of the programme. 
By paying a certain amount as premium, the owner is protected against the risk of uncertainty . In 
insurance, we can say, the risk is transferred or shifted from one person to a group (i.e., all the owners) and 
a person's loss is shared by all the members of the group.
From the above example we can say that insurance is a protective device to one's health and property . In 
this case the individual incurs a certain cost (the premium) for a large uncertain financial loss (the 
contingency insured against) that would exist if there were no insurance. 
Can you manage risk in life? 
When any individual buys insurance, he/she transfers a portion of risk for compensation to the insurance 
company . The company in turn provides him/ her protection at a price, but it's a fraction of recurring 
expense borne by you annually . It is true that events cannot be predicted but the probability of events 
occurring can be calculated on the basis of past experience. Henceforth, steps need to be taken to reduce 
the chance or extent of loss to one's health and property . For example, the use of seat belt in the car can 
reduce the chance of auto injuries and deaths. Therefore, we buy an insurance policy and we transfer the 
risk to the insurance company in exchange for a fee called premium.
 
Nature of Insurance 
Insurance is a cooperative device under which a group of persons who agree to share the financial loss to 
either of them may be brought together voluntarily by a registered company . These companies are called 
insurers and are the risk bearers. They provide insurance to the customer / client who are called the 
insured. The risk is evaluated by the insurer and an amount is charged from the insured. This amount is 
called the premium. The insurance companies provide insurance policies. These policies are legally 
binding contracts between the insurer and the insured. The insured or the policy holders pay insurance 
premium to the insurance company for sharing the risk. 
Insurance provides security and safety to an individual and guarantees payment in the time of loss. It 
ensures compensation for losses suffered due to the incident on unanticipated events. 
It has two fundamental characteristics:
▪ Transferability or shifting of risk from an individual to a group 
▪ Sharing of loss, equally by all the members of the group 
Nature of insurance Risk assessment 
in advance Risk sharing and
transfer 
Cooperative Compensation 
42Elements of Insurable Risks 
It is not feasible for an insurance company to ensure all kinds of loss, rather few elements of loss can be 
insured at a reasonable price. In fact, insurers are not willing to accept all the risk that client may wish to 
transfer to them. Certain characteristics should exist to be considered as a proper subject for insurance. 
For example: 
(i) The loss produced by the risk must be definite and measurable 
(ii) The loss must be fortuitous or accidental 
(iii) The loss must not be catastrophic 
What the customer expects? 
The customer expects information on different products, i.e., policies, their terms and conditions (grace, 
waiting periods, and exclusions). The customer may desire that particular insurance policy should be 
linked to her needs. For example, a parent who is worried about the future of her child would prefer 
educational loan to retirement policy . 
There should be active involvement of the company at the times of settlement of claims. There should also 
be regular contact with the company to dispatch payment to the customer when policy matures or to 
ensure payments in times of emergency . The company should make effort to instantly dispatch policy 
document, health card and other claim settlements.
Functions of Insurance 
The purpose of insurance is generally to protect the insured against uncertainties. 
Certainty 
Insurers reduce the uncertainty of loss and the insured is given guarantee of payment at the time of loss or 
damage. 
Protection 
The insured is assured of protection from probable chance of accident or loss. 
Assist in capital formation 
The accumulated funds in the form of premium are invested in various income generating schemes. 
Prevention of loss 
Insurance does not eliminate or decrease the uncertainty for the individual as to whether or not the event 
will occur , but it will reduce the extent of financial loss connected with the event. 
Insurance provides security and safety 
The insurance provides safety and security against the premature death of a family member or payment at 
the time of old age. Similarly , the property can also be insured so as to provide security to the owner 
against damage or loss in a fire. 
Peace of mind 
It ensures peace of mind against uncertainties like fire, automobile accidents, deaths and other 
contingencies which are beyond human control. 
Elimination of dependency 
What happens to other family members when one of its earning member expires? The insurance company 
assists the family and provides adequate amount of financial assistance at the time of suffering or 
unforeseen accident. 
43Timeline of insurance companies in India 
Date of Registration Name of the company 
1 23-10-2000 HDFC Standard Life Insurance Co. Ltd
2 15-11-2000 Max New Y ork Life Insurance Co. Ltd 
3 24-11-2000 ICICI P rudential Life Insurance Co. Ltd 
4 10-01-2001 Kotak Mahindra Old Mutual Life Insurance Ltd 
5 31-01-2001 Birla Sun Insurance Company Limited 
6 23-10-2001 Reliance Life Insurance Co. Ltd 
7 30-03-2001 Tata AIG Life Insurance Co. Ltd 
8 02-08-2001 ING Vysya Life Insurance Co.Ltd 
9 03-08-2001 Bajaj Allianz Life Insurance Co.Ltd 
10 06-08-2001 Metlife India Insurance Co.Pvt Ltd 
15 4-09-2007 Future General India Life Insurance Co. ltd 11 14-05-2002 Aviva Life Insurance Co. India Pvt Ltd 
12 06-02-2004 Sahara India Insurance Co. Ltd 
13 30-07-2006 Bharti Axa Life Insurance Co. Ltd 
14 3-01-2007 Shriram Life Insurance Co. Ltd 
16 30-03-2001 SBI Life Insurance Co. Ltd 
17 19-12-2007 IDBI Fortis Life Insurance Co. 
How much should you insure? 
One way to deal with risk is to purchase an insurance policy . The amount of the policy will depend upon a 
number of factors. 
Need for minimum protection 
The amount of insurance that any client should purchase depends upon the analysis of the needs that 
would have to be met by dependents when the family earner dies. In this case there is a need to follow 
three steps – first to identify the basic needs that would have to be met after the death of an individual. 
Second, resources available to meet these needs must be sorted out. Last, the difference between the 
existing needs and available resources which needs to be fulfilled has to be identified.
Current income level 
Payment of premium results in an outflow of disposable income. While deciding for insurance, one should 
keep in the mind the regular payment of insurance premium. 
Tax benefits 
The tax benefits under Section 80 C can be availed on purchase of different insurance policies. Individuals 
can avail tax benefits by paying life insurance premium according to the provisions of the Income Tax Act. 
Specific schemes 
An insurance scheme can be bought for a special scheme like education and wedding of children. There is 
provision for acquiring a property through a loan under the various insurance schemes. 
44Annuities for regular income during retirement 
Investment made for retirement purpose will not create any undue financial worries. 
Present age 
Life insurance requires a periodical review based on individual needs in order to ensure that the coverage 
is adequate. One can buy more insurance policies for the same premium at a younger age than at an older 
age.
At a younger age you can undertak e risks since you have ample time to check your decision. The payment 
of premium is spread over a longer duration of time compared to policies opted at later stage in life. 
However , at this stage you should minimise the risk and opt for safe policies. Young 30's family Subtract existing assets from
future expenses, and cover the
difference Extend health insurance to family;
continue accident and asset covers 
Mature 40's family Maintain cover to balance the
shortfall in the existing assets Same as above 
Matured 50's family Maintain cover till you are earning Top up health cover for self and
spouse; continue asset cover 
Retired and over 60 No life cover needed,
unless you have dependants 
 Continue health insurance for self
and spouse; continue asset cover A guideline for purchase of insurance policies in different age groups 
Young 20’s adult Buy only if you have dependants Buy accident and health insurance,
requisite asset cover Age Life Insurance Non-Life insurance 
Principal function of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
IRDA was set up by the Parliament in 1999 to regulate, promote and ensure orderly growth of 
the insurance business. 
Section 14 of IRDA Act, 1999 specified the composition of the authority consisting of 10 
members. 
The authority is a ten-member committee consisting of: 
a) Chairman b) five whole -time members c) four part-time members 
It was formed with the following objectives: 
▪ to set up capital adequacy , solvency and other prudential norms for insurance companies; 
45▪ to decide on granting licences for conducting insurance business and to function as a 
registered authority; 
▪ to set standards for insurance products, to monitor and modify their rates, terms and 
conditions; 
▪ to ensure compliance with prescribed ceilings for management expenses of insurers and 
agency commissions; 
▪ to monitor the quality and performance of inward and outward reinsurances; 
▪ to ensure maintenance of adequate technical reserves by the insurers; 
▪ to review insurers' asset distribution and management and to monitor compliance with 
prescribed potential prudential norms and patterns of investments; 
▪ to detect sickness in the industry and to tak e suitable corrective actions; 
▪ to act as a dispute resolution forum for consumer grievances; 
▪ to prepare and publish an annual report on the state of the insurance industry; and 
▪ to ensure, set and monitor accounting standards and transparency of reporting of 
accounts, to scrutinize and accept annual accounts, valuation reports and solvency 
margin statements. 
Ombudsman 
New legislation came into force in 2013 wherein the insurers can ask questions about any matters that 
could be used as an excuse for not paying a claim. On investigation, the ombudsman can find out whether 
the facts were withheld which cause difficulties in taking decisions.
How and When to Approach the Ombudsman 
01. Write to the grievance cell if the insurance claim is rejected. 
02. In case of unsatisfactory answer or no response, write to the insurance ombudsman. 
03. One should complain within one year of the rejection of claim. The matter should not be 
pending in any court, consumer forum or with an arbiter . 
04. Any complain can be submitted personally or through the post. 
05. All the relevant documents should be attached with the complaints. 
06. One should also give written consent to the ombudsman for acting as a mediator 
07. In case the recommendation is acceptable to you, write within 15 days to the ombudsman, 
who will then pass an award within three months of the date of complaint. 
08. The final award is binding on insurance companies, but you can approach a consumer 
forum or a civil court. 
09. You can get in touch with the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority's Grievance 
Redressal cell through a toll free number 155255 
10. Complaints relating to conduct of agents can be taken up by IRDA's Grievance Redressal 
Cell 
11. No outsourcing: Ensure that you send your complaint personally and not involve lawyer or 
agents. 
Types of insurance: Life Insurance, Health, Home and Auto 
There are many types of insurance such as life insurance, health, home and auto insurance. Life insurance 
covers the risk of unexpected death. Health insurance meets the need of expensive medical treatment. 
Similarly , home insurance covers the risk on burning of the house or when there is robbery in the house. In 
the same fashion car insurance covers the risk of an accident.
Whole - life Policies 
A whole -life policy is one that covers the insured for almost all his life. Under this type of policy , the 
premium is payable throughout the life of the insured person. The policy amount is paid to the beneficiary 
upon the death of the policy holder . Due to its long duration, the premiums may be low. The policy matures 
after a fixed period since the insurance cover ceases to exist and the insured amount is then paid to the 
policy holder .
As an investor in life insurance policy how much would you like to invest? What other factors would you 
consider before opting for a policy? 
Life insurance: How to estimate your insurance needs ? 
In the event of any misfortune, a policy can save the family from financial hardships. Therefore, it becomes 
essential to estimate the amount of life insurance required to meet exigencies.
Guidelines to estimate insurance needs 
Income Rule 
It states that individual cover should be around six to eight times of the customer's gross annual income. 
For example, a person earning a gross annual income of ` 1,00,000 should have between ` 6,00,000 (6 × 
1,00,000) or ` 8,00,000 (8 × 1,00,000) in life insurance cover . 
Income plus Expenses Rule 
This rule indicates that individual insurance need to be equal to five times your gross annual income plus 
the total of basic expenses like housing or car loans, personal debt, child's education, etc. 
46Life insurance is also considered an investment. However , before opting for a policy 
some factors like 
The company's financial strength and integrity , terms and conditions of the policy needs to be 
carefully looked into. One may choose from a variety of policies to suit one's needs.
Stages of life Needs Assets 
Initial stage.
No responsibility Premature death leads
to minimal needs No worthwhile assets 
Married, with children Premature death leads
to financial hardships Growing assets 
Empty nest The needs decline once
children are settled Strong asset base
Source;  Yasaswy N.J (2010) 
47Premiums as Percentage of Income 
In this case, payment of insurance premiums depends on disposable income. One should decide the 
quantum of insurance after meeting the regular outflows from the salary . 
Family Need Approach 
Under this rule, one has to divide family needs into two main categories: immediate needs at death (cash 
needs), and ongoing needs (net income needs). The amount of insurance should cover the immediate and 
ongoing needs of the family . 
An agent should not influence your decision since you are already aware of how to calculate the amount of 
insurance required. Your agent may try and convince you that an insurance scheme has the feature of a 
saving plan as well as an investment plan. However , since the rate of return on a policy is generally low, it 
cannot be compared with a saving scheme of a bank or any investment plan. A saving or investment plan 
may fetch you much higher returns than what you would get on an insurance policy . The purpose of 
insurance is only to assure your life, health or property against risks. 
Health Insurance Schemes 
It is also called accident insurance, sickness insurance and disability insurance. It provides risk coverage 
against unforeseen health expenses that may result in financial hardship. Health insurance schemes also 
cover outpatient department (OPD) expenses for illness, injuries and women during pregnancy and 
childbirth. 
Health insurance is a critical component of financial planning . It means an individual or group is purchasing 
health care coverage in advance by paying a fee called 'premium'. It is an arrangement that helps to defer , 
delay , reduce or altogether avoid payment for health care incurred by individuals and households. It is 
expensive but at the same time necessary . It ensures medical care and limits potential liabilities. Its need 
is felt more in old age. People's lifespan in general, has increased, partly due to effective health care and 
medical facilities available. This facility is provided by both private insurance companies as well as by the 
government. 
The existing health schemes can be categorized as: 
a) Voluntary health insurance scheme or private -for-profit schemes 
b) Employer -based schemes 
c) Insurance offered by NGO's/ community based health insurance 
d) Mandatory health insurance schemes or government run schemes (namely 
    ESIS, CGHS ) ▪ Can tak e loan on your policy 
▪ Keep your parents well informed regarding
   policies 
▪ Surrender your policy at the right time 
▪ Buy adequate personal accident insurance Some Dos and Don ’ts related to policies 
▪ Do not over insure or underinsure 
▪ Pay the premia promptly 
▪ Keep the premium receipts 
▪ Opt for group schemes 
▪ Do not switch from one policy to another
   frequently 
48An example of Community-based Health insurance Scheme 
This scheme was established in 1992, provides health, life and assets insurance to women 
working in the informal sector and their families. The scheme operates in collaboration with the 
National Insurance Corporation (NIC). Under SEW A's (Self Employed Women's Association) 
there is a policy which has a low premium per individual and is paid by the women for life, 
health and assets insurance. At an additional payment, her husband too can be covered. In 
addition, some amount per member is also paid to the National Insurance Corporation (NIC) 
which provides coverage to a maximum of ` 2000 per person per year for hospitalization. After 
being hospitalized at a hospital of one’s choice (public or private), the insurance claim is 
submitted to SEW A. The responsibility for enrolment of members, for processing and 
approving of claims rests with SEW A. NIC in turn receives premium from SEW A annually and 
pays them a lumpsome on a monthly basis for all claims reimbursed. 
Social Insurance or Mandatory Health Insurance Scheme or Government Run Schemes (namely , 
ESIS , CGHS) 
Social insurance is an earmark ed fund set up by the government with explicit benefits in return for 
payment. It is usually compulsory for certain groups in the population and the premiums are 
determined by income (and hence ability to pay) rather than related to health risk. The benefits 
packages are standardized and contributions are earmark ed for spending on health services. The 
government run schemes include the Central Government Health scheme (CGHS) and the Employer 
State Insurance Scheme (ESIS).
Queries raised when considering health care insurance policies 
Questions regarding costs
▪ Monthly premium
▪ Deductible expense
▪ Limits on coverage
▪ Other major expenses not borne by the company 
Questions regarding the doctors/ health care providers
▪ How many doctors are in the plan? 
▪ Who are the doctors in the plan? 
▪ Doctors and their specialization.
▪ Where are the doctors located? 
▪ What heath services do the doctors provide? 
▪ What hospitals/labs/diagnostic centres are in the plan? 
General questions
▪ Is access to specialists only allowed with a referral from primary care physicians? 
▪ What coverage is provided if the patient receives out of the primary network?
▪ If a physician is accessed outside of the plan, are there out-of- network benefits?
Contents of Health Care Insurance policies 
Identification of insured person 
A health insurance contract identifies the insured person. 
49Location 
The health insurance benefits may be confined to a particular area. 
Pre-existing condition 
A policy may exclude coverage for pre-existing conditions, which existed with the individual prior to the 
grant of policy . 
Cancellation operation 
A health insurance contract may allow the insurance company to cancel the contract at any time. Other 
contracts guarantee continuous coverage as long as the policy holders pay premium on time. 
Medical claim 
It provides for reimbursement of hospitalisation expenses incurred for illness/ diseases or injury 
sustained. 
Disability Insurance 
The disability insurance policy will provide benefits if you are unable to do the duties required of your 
occupation. 
Types of Disability Insurance 
Individual disability insurance 
The insurance premium varies with the type of job. For example, work ers employed in any steel plants are 
more at risk than any individual working in office building .
Employer disability insurance 
Employers at some firms are either provided the insurance free (fee borne by the firm) or participate in a 
plan by paying for the coverage.
Insurance from Worker's compensation 
In case of disability , one may receive workman's compensation from the company or organization. 
Home owner's insurance 
One of the easier ways of acquiring a house property is through a loan provided under various insurance 
schemes, where a life insurance policy is accepted as a collateral security . The proceeds of the policy can 
be adjusted towards the housing loan. 
It ensures protection in case of theft, damage to the property , personal liability relating to home 
ownership. Financial loss to the ownership of a house can also occur from a wide variety of adverse 
events like flood and earthquak e. In case of damage or loss of the property , the insured has to produce 
proof of the loss. Therefore, the insured must notify the loss to the police and register a first information 
report (FIR). 
The insurance company under the India Home Insurance policies, provides its customers with instant 
home insurance quotes. Some of the factors which cover home insurance include area of the house (sq. 
ft), location of property , approximate rate of construction (`./sq. ft) and type of construction (only pukka/ 
permanent). However , 50 years and above old properties are exempt from insurance cover . According to 
the sum insured the customer has to pay the premium for every month/quarter/six months. Home 
insurance policies offer different policies to suit the needs of the customer . 
Home Insurance policy covers broadly two things 
Building structure 
Insurance covers for a building structure includes compensation paid for losses due to fire, storm, 
tempest, flood, riot, strike, lightning , explosion and implosion, landslides and rockslides, bursting or 
overflowing of water tanks, apparatus and pipes, earthquak e and damages to the structures due to acts of 
terrorism. The mark et value of the house is not under the coverage, whereas, the cost of the land is 
included within the price of the house. This land cannot be insured. The insurance price is only for covering 
the construction cost of the building . 
Contents inside the Home 
The coverage is for the loss or damage of the valuables inside the building like the electronics and 
electrical goods, furniture, clothing , jewellery , and any other precious contents. The contents are covered 
on the mark et value of the items and in case of a loss the insurance claim is paid on the value of purchasing 
a similar new item exempting the depreciating value. 
Do you have adequate insurance to protect your wealth? 
How much insurance should you plan to have in the future? ‘
Home
Inventory Item
description Model/
registration
No Date
acquired Estimated
cost Estimated
replacement
cost 
Electronics
Laptop
Computer/
Mobile
Camera 
Major
Appliances
Refrigerator
Gas/stove
Blender 
Clothing and
Accessories
Belt, Ties
Dresses 
Jewellery
Watches
Furniture
Living Room
Bedroom 
50
Try to complete the above table of home inventory and find answers to the following questions: 
1.Based on your inventory how much personal property coverage should you have? 
2.How will you estimate the replacement cost? 
3.Have you seen the copies of sale receipt and purchase contracts in your house? 
Replacement Cost Coverage 
Personal property replacement cost coverage depends upon its estimated cost. As indicated in the table, 
home owner's policies also cover assets for their cash value. For example, if any home entertainment 
system is priced at ` 5,000 and is assumed to have a life of five years. Let us assume it has been used for 
half of its life. Based on this amount of depreciation, the insurer will pay the cash value of `. 2500. 
After completing the table, you can take pictures of individual items or audiotape/ videotape all the items 
for further documentation if you wish to insure you assets. 
Factors that affect home/house owner's insurance premiums 
Value of insured house 
Since the value of the house is taken into account, therefore, premium is higher for expensive ones. 
Deductible 
A higher deductible reduces the amount of coverage provided by the home/house owner's insurance, and 
therefore results in lower insurance premium. 
Location 
The chances of damage vary from area to area. It is high for coastal areas than for the houses located in the 
plains. 
Degree of protection 
Protection against natural calamities like flood or earthquak e require a higher premium.
Discounts 
Discounts are provided to the insurer if other insurance (such as auto, health) is purchased from the same 
insurance company . 
Other Home Insurance Related Points 
Hut Insurance 
This insurance applies to those huts used for dwellings and constructed in rural areas with financial 
assistance from banking/cooperative/ government institutions. 
The scope of cover of this policy is against loss or damage due to fire, including fire resulting from 
explosion and short circuiting) lighting , explosion of boiler or gas used for domestic purpose, earthquak e, 
flood, and other allied perils. 
Fire Insurance 
A fire insurance is a contract whereby the insurer undertak es to compensate for any loss or damage 
caused by fire during any specified period. This policy is applicable for one year and has to be renewed 
from time to time. A claim for loss by fire should satisfy the following conditions: 
i) There must be actual loss and not just wear and tear of the asset. 
ii) Fire must be actual and non-intentional. 
51
Insurable Interest 
Insurable interest is an important component of the insurance contract. The insurance company only 
allows persons having insurable interest in the subject matter to opt for a fire insurance policy . 
i) A person has insurable interest in the property he owns. 
ii) A businessman has insurable interest in his stock, plant and machinery and building . 
iii) Partner has insurable interest in the property of partnership firm. 
iv) Mortgage has insurable interest in the property , which is mortgaged. 
It is important to define insurable interest since the company has to pay compensation to the policy holder . 
Motor Insurance 
Motor insurance has been classified according to types of vehicles i.e., scooter/motor cycles, private 
cars, commercial vehicles and other vehicles. No motor vehicle can run in a public place unless it is 
insured against third party liability . 
Motor insurance is a mandatory requirement for all vehicles owners whether needed for personal and 
commercial uses. The premium varies from car to car like costly car has high premium and cheap car has 
lesser rate of the premium. 
The claims offered by the car insurance company in India can be categorized as 
a) Accidental claims, b) theft or burglary claims and c) third party claims. 
Auto insurance provides protection against damage to an automobile and expenses associated with 
accidents. The policy specifies the coverage provided by an insurance company for a particular individual 
or a vehicle. In this way, it protects the vehicle and also limits potential liabilities (expenses due to 
accidents). The rates of premium vary substantially among locations, insurance companies and even 
among the policy holders.
Factors that affect motor insurance premium 
Insurance policy is determined by the claims an insurer submits to the company . An auto insurance 
premium will be higher for a policy that specifies a greater amount of liability coverage and lower 
deductible. 
Coverage offered by motor insurance companies in India 
In case of motor insurance the liability incurred is in respect of :
▪ Death or personal injury to owner of the goods or his authorised representative in goods vehicle. 
 ▪ Liability insured in respect of death or bodily injury of any passenger of a public service vehicle.
 ▪ Liability arising under Workman Compensation Act, 1923 in respect of death or bodily injury of: 
i) Paid driver in a vehicle 
ii) Conductor or ticket examiner in a public service vehicle 
iii) Workers carried in a goods vehicle
▪ Liability in respect of death/ injury to passeners who are carried for hire or by reason of or in pursuance of 
contract of employment. 
The risk covered by the Third Party policy includes death or injury to a third party and damage to a third 
party property . Liability in the case of death or injury is unlimited. 
Auto Insurance Coverage will not cover the following : 
When car is used beyond the geographical territory . 
Depreciation, consequential damage, electrical and mechanical breakdown, snag or breakage, 
Intoxicated driving .
52
Characteristics of your car 
Value of car determines the amount of premium. Insurance premium is high for new cars. In addition, the 
premium is high for expensive cars. 
If You Are In an Auto Accident 
In case of an auto accident, contact the police immediately . You may also note down licence plate 
numbers from witnesses, if the other driver leaves before the arrival of the police. If possible take pictures 
of any evidence that may prove that you are not at fault. Write down the details of the accident. After the 
arrival of police ask for the police report.
File a complaint with the insurance company immediately . The company will examine the police report 
and may also contact the witnesses. An agent employed by the insurance company may investigate the 
details of the accident. He will survey the site and the automobile and assess the damages to determine 
the amount of compensation paid by the insurance company . 
Hit-and-run accidents 
In hit-and-run accidents the insurance companies are not held liable since the vehicle which has hit the 
victim cannot be traced. The victim can be compensated by the solatium fund established by the 
government. The comprehensive auto insurance policy provides for damage caused to the vehicle due to 
man-made or natural calamities. 
Renewal of Auto Insurance 
If a vehicle's auto insurance policy is not renewed, driving that vehicle is illegal. Also if the vehicle meets 
an accident the insurance company will not pay any claims. No claim bonus will be forfeited. Auto 
insurance can be renewed with another insurer , including the bonus at your earlier insurer .
Insurance sector plays a vital role in the process of economic development of the country also. The 
process of capital formation is encouraged by the insurance services. The sector acts as mobiliser of 
savings, as financial intermediary , as promoter of investment activities, as stabilizer of financial mark et, 
and as risk manager . Insurance services lead to efficient and productive allocation of capital resources, 
prevent the losses to the firms by encouraging loss preventive measures, facilitate growth of trade and 
commerce, complement government social security programmes and assist the individual and firms in 
efficient management of the risks. In turn, economic development also facilitates reach of insurance both 
in terms of its dispersion and concentration. 
53
02CHAPTER 6
In the chapter on managing your money , you have read about fixed deposits in banks on which you are 
assured a fixed return in the form of interest. These are considered safe investments as returns are 
guaranteed by the bank. Other safe investments are provident fund, public provident fund, saving 
schemes in post offices, etc. 
There are many other avenues for investment which may give higher returns than banks. Of course, the 
risks will also increase as higher returns are expected. For this, you may invest in shares and debentures 
of a company , mutual funds, bonds and other investment plans. These are generally known as financial 
products. Mutual funds are of various types and investment in them can be tailored to suit your 
requirements. We shall learn about this and other financial products in this section. 
Why Invest? 
When we have surplus money , we think about investing it in something which gives us good return. We 
may start on our business if we are enterprising , and willing to undertak e risk. In this case, we are using 
our surplus money or funding a business and expect to earn a good return. INVESTING MONEY
54¤
55In case we are not willing to start our business, we may invest our money in other companies through 
shares or debentures. If we do not have enough information about the stock exchange operations then we 
may consult a financial advisor for investment in other financial products like government bonds, mutual 
funds, etc. 
Saving money in an almirah is not an investment. However , saving money in a bank is an investment as it 
assures some return on your investment. Investor buys the shares of a particular company in expectation 
of earning a better return in terms of appreciation in the mark et price of the share. Similarly , when an 
investor subscribes to the debentures of a company , he expects a fixed interest return for a given period. 
When a person invests in a house he either plans for his own stay or to earn some rental income. 
Investment in insurance assures security as well as minimum return to the insurers.
The basic objective of any investment is to minimize risk and maximize the expected returns besides 
ensuring stability , liquidity and tax benefits. T oday managing one's investment has become challenging 
and complex. Due to new economic and political situations, stock mark ets across the globe witness 
unprecedented volatility . Domestic mark ets, too, have been integrated with the global mark ets ever since 
the boom in technology . Therefore, investment in different types of products in one's portfolio at this 
juncture would be beneficial to any individual in many ways.
Investors in general spend a lot of time deciding about a financial product. In India, investors prefer to 
invest in secured debt products that guarantees return from it. Therefore, banks fixed deposits or saving 
deposits form one of the biggest components of investment. Be it a share or a mutual fund, they are 
looking for returns and checking whether it is beating the benchmark indices. This kind of haphazard 
investment is not recommended. A financial advisor would want investors to set their goals and 
accordingly decide the different products/assets to include in their portfolio.
How can Varmas benefit by diversifying their investment portfolio 
Rohit Varma decides to invest in real estate. He thinks that it is the best investment option. 
Rohit is a director in a private company and brings home an impressive six digit salary of ` 1.5 
lakh every month. He is married to 33-year -old Ritika who, too, is an executive in a private 
company . They have three -year -old daughter and two-year -old son.
 
On analysing Rohit's investment plan, it has been found that they had heavy bias towards 
investment in real estate. The couple had been investing money in two bulky loans undertak en 
to purchase a house. Their investment approach has not only jeopardized the fulfilment of their 
financial goal but also indicates concentration of funds in one asset, i.e., real estate. 
There is no dearth of funds with the family . Insufficient surplus is not the issue rather the couple 
needs to be apprised regarding diversification or allocation of assets. The financial planner 
never advises to put all the eggs in one basket. Investment in different assets is based on the 
notion that even when there is a fluctuation in some assets (in terms of up and down 
movement in an economy) one is assured of consistent average return from one's portfolio. It 
is, therefore, advisable to distribute one's investment in other forms of assets like gold, mutual 
fund, equity , real estate and so on. In this case we find the couple has no investment in equities. 
Apart from mandatory employee provident fund, they have no debt cushion. What will happen 
if there is burst in the price of real estate? The volatility in interest rate may reduce the 
credibility of real estate. Further , real estate is a highly illiquid asset and there is maintenance 
costs associated with it. 
56The couple also feels the need of saving for the education of their children. Nevertheless, they 
want to stock an ample amount of money for their kids' future needs also. They plan to have 
some investment in health cover also. 
Let us analyse V arma's investment decisions in real estate 
Advantages associated with
Varma ’s investment Disadvantages associated with
Varma's investment 
Investment in real estate 
Investment at an early stage No investment in equities 
No debt cushion
No insurance policies 
Relevance of allocation in different assets:  Why are we investing in particular financial products. What 
are our expectations from that investment? 
Safety 
A well functioning system helps people reduce their exposure to risks. For example, you expect to earn 
15% rate of return on your investment but in actual you earn only 12% thus you fail to minimize your risk. 
Safety is an important factor to consider while allocating funds to assets. 
Liquidity 
Liquidity is conversion of your assets into cash. Investment of funds in some securities may provide high 
return after a fixed period of time. In the meantime if you need cash, buyers may not be available as they 
may be infrequently traded shares. Here you may have to compromise by selling at a lower price. We see, 
that this share was not easily converted into cash and hence not so liquid. However , there are other assets 
which are considered to be more liquid and may be converted into cash when required. Thus, our portfolio 
should consist of different kinds of assets.
Tax Benefits 
Investors plan their investment in such a way so that they can avail tax incentives on the given investment 
opportunities. For example., if an investor invests his money in National Saving Certificate (NSC), he 
would be entitled for tax rebate u/s 80-c of the Income tax Act, 1961. Likewise investment in insurance 
policies and mutual funds also provides tax rebates under the same section. 
Purchasing power stability or hedge against inflation 
The investor ensures that the return earned on his investment shall be greater than the inflation rate. For 
example, if an investor invests ` 200 at the rate of 10% per annum therefore, he will get ` 210 after one 
year. If the price of the commodity increases by more than ` 210 then the very purpose of investment gets 
defeated. 
57Why investment is encouraged at an early age? 
The effect of compounding can work better in early years. It is one of the effective ways of 
making the money multiply for you. It is also necessary that we stay on track of committed and 
disciplined investor . Let us understand with the example of Uday and Rajesh. They both 
entered the job mark et at the age of 23. Uday decides to keep aside ` 25,000 every year from 
the age of 25 until he turned 30, that is, for a period of five years. After 30, he did not touch his 
investment that is he neither added nor withdrew anything from his capital till he turned 60. 
Rajesh, on the other hand decided to start saving only when he turned 35. From then on till he 
turned 65, that is, for the next 30 years, he kept aside ` 25,000 every year. 
Guess who saved more? 
At 65, Uday's investment of ` 1.5 lakh was equivalent to ` 54.2 lakh, while Rajesh's savings of 
` 7.5 lakh yielded ` 45.23 lakh. 
Source:  Layman's Guide to Retirement Planning . 
Five steps to help to avoid investment blunders 
At the beginning of every month chalk out how much you intend to save and invest every month in 
different assets. Then spread out this amount as per your convenience.
Determine your financial goal like child's education, retirement and insurance cover or a house to dwell in. 
On the basis of your plan invest in a tax saving option. 
Automate your investment to ensure even if you forget to invest every month, banks can make your 
payment. 
In case of insurance do not commit yourself to multi-year payments. Purchase of insurance assessing its 
features. Buy health insurance after careful considerations of its features and clauses. 
Be cautious against your deductions. Take into account deductions such as tuition fees of children and 
home loan repayment while estimating saving needed under section 80c.
Rajiv and his new project 
Rajiv after completing his course in management has opted for a new project which requires 
him to stay abroad for three years. He got married recently to Seema who happened to be his 
friend in college. His posting in a new place along with new project may provide him 
opportunity to earn additional income. 
How do you think Rajiv, after covering major expenses, should invest his surplus which he has 
earned abroad? 
58Where to invest the surplus? 
His parents advised him to buy a house in Bangalore, where he is likely to return after his posting . His wife 
thinks of investment in gold jewellery . His uncle thinks he should invest the saving in safe instruments 
such as bank deposits. 
The additional income that Rajiv will earn from his new project provides him good opportunity to build 
some assets. His prime consideration should be liquidity of his assets depending upon his needs. Another 
objective that should determine his choice is growth in the value of his assets. 
Let us critically analyse the various options available to Rajiv for investment. Buying a house would be an 
attractive option as it would ensure roof and value would appreciate over a period of time. However , the 
disadvantage erupts when he is transferred to other place or he undertak es some other projects abroad. 
At a time when his career needs flexibility , the house would be an inflexible investment. 
Investment in gold too would be limiting his choice since it may turn out to be an illiquid investment. 
Selling gold may not give a lucrative return and a tough decision considering his wife's passion for 
jewellery . 
Bank deposits are no doubt a safe option, but the rate of interest is very low and does not ensure growth 
over a period of years. 
It would be optimum for Rajiv to opt for mix of investments in different assets. He can make small 
investment in a house, a proportion in jewels and some amount may be invested in bank deposit and 
mutual funds to ensure liquidity and higher flexibility .
some other projects abroad. At a time when his career needs flexibility , the house would be an inflexible 
investment. 
Investment in gold too would be limiting his choice since it may turn out to be an illiquid investment. 
Selling gold may not give a lucrative return and a tough decision considering his wife's passion for 
jewellery . 
Bank deposits are no doubt a safe option, but the rate of interest is very low and does not ensure growth 
over a period of years. 
It would be optimum for Rajiv to opt for mix of investments in different assets. He can make small 
investment in a house, a proportion in jewels and some amount may be invested in bank deposit and 
mutual funds to ensure liquidity and higher flexibility . 
earning , its mark et value declines. Some firms distribute quarterly income to their shareholders in the form 
of dividends rather than reinvest the earnings in the firm's operations. 
Some individual investors called day traders buy stock and then sell them on the same day. They hope to 
earn a return on a very short term movement in share prices. Day trading is not recommended for most 
investors. Moreover , this type of investment is risky because the stock prices of even best managed firms 
periodically decline.
Where do you think Rajiv should invest? 
There are certain sunrise industries like biotechnology , and sunset industries like jute. There are high-tech 
industries (instrumentation), and low tech industries (solvent extraction). Then there are capital-intensive 
industries like petrochemicals, and labour -intensive like textiles. Thus, industries can be classified into 
59several types. Each industry goes through a certain life cycle from a small beginning to massive growth, to 
stagnation and eventual decline. Thus, Rajiv has to take a decision on the basis of the information he 
collects about various companies.
Bonds 
Bonds are issued to raise funds in the same way an individual borrows funds from banks. An individual has 
to hypothecate its assets with the bank as security in proportion to the demand for the loan. In case of 
failure of an individual to refund the money , the bank has the right to sell off these assets to recover its 
dues. On similar lines, a corporate can borrow funds from the general public. Here the sole borrower is a 
company and there are many moneylenders in the form of individual investors. Since a company cannot 
pledge or mortgage its assets separately with each individual, it pledges its assets with a trust constituted 
for this purpose. The trustee is conferred with the power to dispose of the assets of the company in case of 
failure to meet the commitment of individual investors. A company issues certificates to bond holders 
while borrowing funds from the individual investors. This is known as bond certificate. 
National Saving Certificates 
National Saving Certificates are bonds issued by the central government with tenure of six years and sold 
through post offices. Individuals including minors and trusts can invest in NSCs. They are issued in 
denominations ranging from `. 100 to 10,000. They offer interest rate of 8% compounded half yearly . The 
accumulated amount is paid on maturity . Premature encashment 80 
can be done after a period of three years after deducting some amount. It is eligible for tax rebate under 
section 80c. 
Mutual funds 
Investors who desire to invest their funds in corporate securities lack information regarding profiles of 
companies. Such investors can invest their funds in corporate securities through mutual funds. The pooled 
funds are invested by expert portfolio managers. They help the clients to invest in SIPs. Since mutual funds 
allow investment in numerous stocks, it enables investors to achieve broad diversification with an 
investment as low as ` 500. Unit Trust of India was the first mutual fund set up in 1964. The main objective 
of the UTI was to mobilize the savings of the household sector . 
A mutual fund can generate a capital gain for individual investors, since the price at which investors sell 
their shares can be higher than the price at which they purchased their shares. However , the price of the 
mutual fund's share may decline over time, which would result in a capital loss. Take A SIP (Systematic Investment Plan) to Grow Your Wealth 
▪ A SIP helps you invest small amounts on a regular basis. You can invest in equity , debt or 
balanced scheme using a SIP. 
▪ You should continue with your SIPs irrespective of stock mark et conditions. Never close your 
SIP even if the economy faces depression. 
▪ SIPs offer you dual benefits of averaging and compounding through mark et cycles. 
▪ You can choose a date of your SIP based on your cash flow. 
▪ You can invest in SIPs by using the electronic clearing service or post- dated cheques.
 ▪ Do remember that SIPs do not ensure assured returns or safety of principal. 
60Mutual F unds 
Check out the asset allocation schemes from mutual funds. These funds will help you in 
allocating money across different asset classes depending on your investment goals and risk 
taking ability . The fund first defines the asset allocation and then identifies a basket of different 
funds in which it will invest. There are good options for an investor looking for expert advice to 
invest based on asset allocation. 
It is the risk profile and life stage of the investor that will decide which of the options he or she 
will choose. Franklin Templeton AMC has come out with plans with life stages, e.g., a twenty- 
five-year -old person can choose to invest in FT India Life Stage Fund 20's plan. This fund has 
defined the asset allocation as 80% for equity and 20% for debt. Money is invested in Franklin 
India Blue Chip Fund (50%), Franklin India Prima Fund (15% ), Templeton India Growth Fund 
(15%), Templeton India Income Builder Fund (10%), and Templeton India Income Fund (10%). 
This makes the investment process much easier for investors and the inbuilt rebalancing 
features help in maintaining the target asset allocation, which could go awry due to mark et 
movements. 
The best part of investing in asset allocation fund is that you will get access to a basket of funds 
with different investment styles that will invest according to your asset allocation plan. It 
saves time needed for investing in multiple schemes and tracking them. 
Source:  Economic Survey? 
Debt 
Fixed Deposits 
One of the oldest investment avenues in India is bank fixed deposits. It gives a returns of 6%-8% per annum 
depending on the tenure. It is a safe investment device for those who do not have a risk appetite and have 
traditionally put their money in them. 
Insurance 
It is an investment- cum-risk management instrument. The objective of insuring one's life is to provide 
financial security to oneself and to the family members. The details of this policy have been discussed in 
the next chapter . A policy can be opted after evaluating one's needs. 
Other investment avenues for Rajiv 
Investment in agricultural land 
Income from agricultural land may be in various forms like land rent and sale proceeds of agricultural 
produce. The value of agricultural lands has been highly appreciating in some parts of the country .
Farmhouse 
Income can be generated by investment in farmhouses by giving them on rent or by selling the produce of 
the agricultural land. A farmhouse is any building owned or occupied by a cultivator . 
Urban land 
Due to increasing pressure of population on land, land prices have gone up all over the world. Investment in 
61urban land can also be profitable. 
Gold 
It lends stability to the portfolio and acts as a hedge against inflation and is highly liquid. 
Bars, coins and biscuits 
Bars and coins can be purchased from jewellers or bullion traders. In the past few years, banks have 
started retailing 24 carat gold biscuits. It retains its purity and comes in tamper proof covers. An individual 
can gain by selling the bars, coins and biscuits when there is hike in gold prices 
Gold Electronically Traded Funds( ETFs) 
It is equivalent to 1 gram of gold, are held electronically in the demat form and traded on exchanges. They 
offer investors the advantage of security , convenience and liquidity . These products are regulated by SEBI 
and the risk is lower . Income from ETFs is treated as long-term capital gains and taxed at lower rate if the 
holding period exceeds one year compared with three years as in the case of physical gold. Unlik e physical 
gold, investors are assured transparency in pricing as there are no making charges or premium involved 
and units are traded on the exchange. 
E-gold 
E-gold offers liquidity more than most of the gold. Each unit of e-gold is equivalent to one gram of physical 
gold and is held in the demat account. It is the only form of paper gold that allows conversion to physical 
gold, or rematerialisation. Offered by the National Spot Exchange Limited (NSEL), e-gold can be bought by 
setting up a trading account. 
Test Y our Money Quotient 
Are you a savvy investor and an informed spender? Take this quick test to find out your money 
quotient. 
01) It is best to invest in tax-saving mutual funds at one go when the mark ets fall. Y/N 
02) In case of a child's bank account, there is no penalty if minimum balance is not maintained. 
Y/N 
03) This is the right time to invest in the infrastructure sector through infra funds. Y/N 
04) If you sell a flat within three years of buying it, the profit is added to your income for that  
year and taxed accordingly . Y/N 
05) Cost inflation indexation of capital gains will always help reduce tax liability . Y/N 
06) If you are a doctor , you may get a discount on your car insurance premium. Y/N 
07) NSC investment is eligible for tax benefit under Sec80. Y/N 
08) If you shift to 3G mobile services, you pay extra for voice calls and SMSs. Y/N 
09) You cannot avail of more than ` 20 lakh if you take an education loan from a bank. Y/N 
10) Long-term capital gains from stocks are tax free. Y/N 
Give yourself one point for every correct answer . 
8-10 You are smart investors and know the tricks. Try fine tuning your portfolio. 
4-7  Well, your money quotient is average. You know the basics but you have a lot to learn. 
0-3  You have a lot of catching up to do. Remember it is never too late.
Answer  1) No, 2) No, 3) No, 4) Y es 5) No 6) Y es 7) Y es 8) No 9) Y es 10) Y es 
62Individual Investors and Institutional Investors 
Investing money requires considerable expertise since there are so many avenues of investment as 
discussed. Individual investors, like us, may wish to invest directly in shares and the stock mark et, if we 
are willing to take risk. However , if we do not have adequate information about the stock mark et, we may 
prefer safe investments like fixed deposits in banks. Or, we may decide to invest in mutual funds.
As an investor you can do it on your own or seek help of institutional investors . Institutional investors are 
professionals employed by financial institutions who are responsible for managing money of clients like 
Rajiv. They advise the client to invest in different kinds of mutual funds and other securities. They select 
shares and securities of different companies so that investors get a reasonable return on their investment. 
The employees of financial institutions who make investment decisions for clients are also referred to as 
portfolio managers. 
Like institutional investors, individual investors invest a portion of their money to earn a reasonable 
return on their investment. Individual investors may hold their stock for more than a year. These investors 
usually analyse the changes in share prices regularly and accordingly take decision to buy or sell different 
shares. Some stocks may promise a higher return but an individual should keep his capacity for risk 
bearing intact. An investor should not get swayed by ups and downs in the mark et. This kind of investor 
needs to patiently watch the mark et rather than change decisions on a weekly basis. 
63CHAPTER 7
Sheila lives with her parents in a joint family . She attended the farewell party organised by her 
grandfather's office colleagues on his retirement. She wondered how he would manage his expenses 
without his usual salary . Her grandfather then explained since he was working in a government office, he 
would be getting a sum every month known as pension. Had he work ed in a private organisation or 
engaged in business, he would not be getting pension. In that case he would have to plan or invest money 
to get a regular flow of income. Sheila suddenly realised that her grandfather still willingly provided her 
with pocket money . She wondered if there was no pension what would her grandfather have done? 
Retirement planning is a part of overall financial planning process. It is an attempt to figure out how much 
money you need to save each month in order to have a comfortable retirement and be financially secure by 
making best of the accumulated retirement assets. Planning for retirement acquires added importance 
because, normally , people over-estimate what they have and under -estimate how much they would need 
for their post- retirement. At the verge of retirement, your needs will rapidly be changing . You will be asking 
the big questions – what does retirement mean to me, and will I have enough? How can I be better off? As 
our lives change, our financial needs and priorities change too. RETIREMENT PLANNING 
64Whether you are a salaried person employed with a government organisation or a private sector 
organisation or a self-employed person, the fact remains that you have to retire one day. The benefit with 
the person employed with any government organisation is that there is a provision for a pension scheme 
which serves as a regular income to the retired person to support his/her monthly expenses in the post-
retirement years. But, the people outside the pension scheme coverage need to take concrete steps to 
plan for their post-retirement income and earnings. 
Thus, in order to be comfortable in the post-retirement years, there is a need to start planning from today 
itself . The sooner you start investing , the better it is. You can then experience the effect of compounding . 
Let us take an example: Yogesh, who is now 25 years of age in 2011, starts investing  ` 10,000 every 
month. If his investments grow by 6% p.a., he will end up with ` 1.38 crore in 2046 when he attains the age 
of 60. If he puts off this exercise for next 10 years, that is, till 2021, he will end up with ` 67.95 lakh.
Did you notice that this amount is less than half the amount that he would have if he had began investing 
early? It is crucial to stay on track, that is, remain committed and disciplined. If you give up the habit of 
saving and investing midway , it will not yield the expected returns and affect the financial plan for 
retirement. 
In order to know how much you need to save, you first need to ascertain how much funds you will need 
after retirement. This involves calculating your monthly earnings (from occupation, interest, dividends, 
pension or any other investment that you might have). Here, it is necessary to take into account the rate of 
inflation . 
For example, Sunitha would like to retire in 10 years. She expects inflation to be at an average of 6% 
throughout the period. After retirement she wants to maintain the same level of living standard which she 
is presently enjoying . At present she is spending `10,000 p.m. To calculate how much she should save 
today will depend how much she would need 10 years from now. With inflation of 6%, the worth of 
`10,000 p.m. today would approximately be `17,900 p.m.1, i.e., ` 2,14,800 p.a.
For example, Sunitha would like to retire in 10 years. She expects inflation to be at an average of 6% 
throughout the period. After retirement she wants to maintain the same level of living standard which she 
is presently enjoying . At present she is spending `10,000 p.m. To calculate how much she should save 
today will depend how much she would need 10 years from now. With inflation of 6%, the worth of 
`10,000 p.m. today would approximately be `17,900  p.m., i.e., ` 2,14,800 p.a. Why do you need to save? 
You have to retire one day. You can choose the age but cannot postpone it indefinitely . The biggest 
question is, when the time of retirement arrives, will you have enough income to continue the lifestyle you 
were enjoying before retirement. The amount of pension alone will not be sufficient for most of us. 
Remember , the average life expectancy is improving with the advancement in the health care sector . The 
average person who retires at the age of 58-60 looks forward to another 20 years of life. For this it 
becomes imperative to save enough funds in your 30-35 working life. 
Inflation is a widespread and sustained increase in the general price level of goods and 
services. Economists say that when prices go up 3 per cent or more a year, the country is in a 
state of inflation. While just about everyone gets hurt by inflation, people who live on fixed 
incomes may feel the crunch more than others because prices rise but their income doesn't. 
That's why it makes sense to build-in inflation into your retirement plans. 
10,000 X1.06     17900  1 10 =1
65This chapter will help you understand how much you need to grow your wealth before you retire and how 
to plan for it.
Tools for Planning 
Financial Independence 
Financial independence is the goal of retirement planning . It is not something that can be done in a day, a 
week, or even in a month. It is not an event but rather a recursive and cyclical process. The key aspect of 
retirement planning is to choose the right investment vehicles which will help you reaching your financial 
goals. 
Portfolio planning/Asset allocation 
A good retirement planning depends on asset allocation rather than confining oneself to a single 
investment. For this reason, it is good to spread your investment capital around and understand the 
income and growth objectives for future performance. You should not put all your eggs in the same basket. 
What is required is a portfolio with right combination of assets. You may have various financial assets, 
namely , shares, debentures, bonds, life insurance, annuities, mutual funds, fixed deposit, company 
deposits, PPF, monthly income schemes, national savings certificates, etc., in your portfolio. In addition to 
this, it may also contain tangible assets that can take the form of gold, silver jewellery , precious stones like 
diamonds, real estate, painting , carvings, etc., and other collectibles. Apart from providing good hedge 
against inflation, they also emerge as an attractive alternative investment avenue. You may also have 
some insurance to cover risk. 
What assets? 
Primarily , all assets are divided into two categories: 
i. Real assets 
ii. Financial assets 
Your real assets are the physical assets that you own and are tangible. It means investing in immovable 
property such as a house, a flat, a plot of land or a commercial space. The other item under real asset is 
gold and other precious stones. However , investment in gold jewellery is mostly done with the intention of 
safe keeping rather than for sale-resale purposes. The positive side of investing in gold is its high liquidity 
value. 
Financial assets are the claims on real assets and can be converted into cash easily . Depending on the 
nature of investment, financial assets are of two types: equity and debt.What you can do to achieve your retirement goals 
The retirement is a new chapter in one's life and the life is not over by any means at the time of 
retirement. The people either decide to start another job to spend the time or they choose to 
spend their time with the family and friends. It does not matter what you choose, what matters 
is that you live a happy life once you have retired. 
1. Define your need and financial objectives. 
2. Diversification and optimal asset allocation in accordance with one's risk appetite is a key 
to successful financial and retirement planning . 
3. If you start early, you can build large corpus for retirement. It is a myth, that one should start 
planning for retirement when you are 40+. Remember the power of compounding . 
Financial Assets Retirement Assets 
Financial Assets 
Equity 
Shares and
Stocks Equity
Mutual F unds  Debt 
Fixed
Deposits PO savings
schemes Government
Securities Bonds and
Debentures Provident F und,
New P ension
Schemes Real Assets 
Real Estate Gold 
Land, House,
Apartments Coins
Jewellery  Figure 1 
66Equity implies investing in stocks and mutual funds. Investment in stocks involves buying shares of public 
and private companies. When you buy shares of a company , you become a part owner of the company 
and share the company's profit and bear losses. Shares can be bought from both primary mark et (public 
offering) and secondary mark et (stock exchange). Shares are traded in the stock exchange and their 
prices fluctuate on daily basis. Investment in share mark et should be a purely long-term investment. 
Mutual funds are essentially a pooling of small resources of individuals which are handed over to a 
professional fund manager who invests this money in the stock exchange and according to the objectives 
of the scheme.
Debt: Bank fixed deposits is one of the very popular investment avenues in India. This investment is 
commonly done by the people who have a very low risk taking aptitude and wish to make safe investment 
in banks. Similar to the bank fixed deposits, the postal saving schemes continue to be one of the most 
popular fixed income instruments in India. The post office small saving schemes like Kisan Vikas Patra , 
Monthly Income Scheme, Public Provident Fund, Time Deposit Scheme, Recurring Deposit, National 
Saving Scheme and Senior Citizen Scheme are backed by sovereign guarantee and are zero risk 
investments. These schemes, however , have a lock-in period between 1-15 years ( refer Figure 2). The 
services of the post office has been successfully tapped into the rural savings mark et by offering higher 
rate of return than that extended by scheduled banks. Nearly all post office schemes give returns of about 
8% p.a. 
Benefits of investing in post office schemes 
▪  These schemes are offered by Government of India. 
▪  Safe, secure and risk -free investment options. 
▪  No tax deduction at source. LOOKING at RETIREMENT ASSETS 
Note: The chart does not include important hybrid options such as insurance -cum-investment products like unit 
linked life insurance policies and also products that combine debt and equity such as monthly income plans (MIP s) 
and balanced funds from mutual funds. 
67▪  Nomination facility is available. 
▪  Nomination can be changed any time. 
▪  The instruments are transferable to any post office anywhere in India. 
▪  Attractive rate of interest. 
Other debt instruments 
In addition to these, government securities (G-secs.) issued by Reserve Bank of India, in lieu of the central 
government borrowings programme, bonds and debentures issued by companies, financial institutions or 
even by governments are also available for the public as debt instruments. Over and above the scheduled 
interest payments, the par value of the instrument is received at a specified maturity date. The risk in these 
instruments is almost nil. 
Pension Schemes 
Further , the new pension schemes introduced by the government to give people a way to get a pension 
during their old age. Employees of the government sector already get a pension, so this scheme is 
introduced as a security measure that enables people from the unorganised sector to draw a pension as 
well. The working mechanism is simple. You contribute a certain sum every month during your working 
years, which is then invested according to your preference. You can then withdraw the money when you 
retire which is currently at 60 years. NPS is meant to be a pension scheme , so it is geared towards giving 
you a steady stream of income on your retirement. 
Figure 2
Post office Small Savings Schemes 
Kisan Vikas P atra
Monthly Income
Scheme 
 ▪ Money doubles in 8 years 7 months.
▪ No limit on investment.
▪ Available in the denomination of ` 100, 500, 1000, 5000 , 10,000
  and 50,000 in all head post offices
▪ 8% p.a. payable monthly . 
▪ Minimum ` 6000, Maximum ` 3 lakh in single account and 6 lakh
   in joint account. 
▪ Maturity period 6 years 
 
▪ 8% p.a. compounded yearly .
▪ Minimum ` 500 maximum ` 70,000 in a financial year . 
▪ Deposits can be made in lump sum or 12 monthly instalments. 
▪ Interest is completely tax free. 
▪ Withdrawal is permissible from the 7th  year.15-year P ublic
Provident Account 
Post office Time
Deposit Account ▪ Interest payable annually but calculated quarterly . 
▪ Minimum ` 50 maximum no limit 
5-year post office
recurring deposit
account ▪ Minimum ` 10 per month any amount in maximum limit. 
▪ One withdrawal up to 50% of the balance allowed in the multiple of
   ` 5 after 3 years. 
68Post office savings
account ▪ Minimum of `50 and maximum of `1,00,000 for an individual account. 
▪ ` 2,00,000 for joint account. 
▪ No limit on group, institutional or official capacity accounts. 
National Savings
Certificate ▪ Interest compounded six monthly payable at maturity .
▪  Certificate can be purchased by an adult or on the behalf of a minor . 
Deposit Scheme for
Retiring Govt.
Employees ▪ 8% p.a. payable half yearly . 
▪ Minimum ` 1000 maximum not exceeding the total retirement
   benefits. 
But, how can you be sure that your portfolio has all the components adequate enough to cover all your 
retirement needs? There are certain investments which every individual ought to make though their 
relative priority changes with age as illustrated below: 
Young (25-35
years of age) Middle aged
(35-45 years
of age) Senior ( 45-60
years of age) Retired 
60 + age 
Life insurance
Medical Insurance
House/Flat 
Tax oriented savings
schemes 
Mutual F unds 
Debt Instruments Medium
Low
Medium
Low
Medium
LowMedium
Medium
High
Medium
High
MediumLow 
High
High
Medium
High
MediumNil 
High
High
Low 
High
High 
Also, savings bank accounts have to be maintained by all of us for meeting ongoing liquidity needs. Each 
type of investment has distinct advantages and disadvantages, which tends to behave differently in 
different types of economic mood and swings. Your retirement portfolio should broadly be diversified and 
well balanced. 
Estimating the Retirement Expenses 
Let us now review various factors that you should consider while building your retirement portfolio. 
The Power of Compounding 
For sound financial planning , cash flows should be related to the relevant time period. Distinction has to be 
made between ` 100 received today and ` 100 to be received at a future date. This is because the ` 100 
received today can earn interest on it. Assume the rate of interest at 15% p.a. and consider the following 
example: 
69Now                           100 
Interest                        15
At the end of I year    115 Interest in the 4 th year     22.81 
At the end of IV year     174.90 
Interest in the 2nd       17.25  
year                         132.25 
At the end of II year      Interest in the 5 th year   26.24 
At the end of V year    201.14 
Interest in the 3rd      19.84 
year                         152.09 
At the end of III year 
The example shows the calculated compound interest from year to year, i.e., ` 100 invested today grows 
to 201.14 in the fifth year if invested at 15% compound interest p.a. at the end of the 5th year. 
Hence, 'compounding' implies earning interest on your interest. Here, the point to note is that the more 
often interest is compounded, the more you accumulate. Thus, semi-annual compounding pays more than 
annual compounding , quarterly more than semi-annual and monthly more than quarterly . (see table 1. ) 
9,083              16,502
9,031                 16,310
8,954           16,036Monthly              
Quarterly            
Semi-annual             
Annual              8,810                  15,530 Growth of an investment of ` 5000 invested @12% p.a. 
Frequency of compounding Amount at the end of 5 years Amount at the end of 10 years 
The simple way to figure out the impact of compounding is illustrated by the 'rule of 72'. When funds are 
invested on a compound interest basis, your investment doubles at regular frequencies depending on the 
rate of interest and frequency of compounding . There is a simple method of calculating how long it will 
take for your money to double: divide 72 by the interest rate. For example, at 8% it takes 9 years (72/9), it 
takes approx. 6 years (72/12) and at 24 % it takes 3 years (72/24). This rule applies to compound interest 
only. The impact of compound interest is solely reaped in the long run. The longer you keep your 
investments on compound interest basis, the greater is your gain. The best way is to invest in mutual 
funds or set up a RD account with a bank. The decision regarding choosing between an RD and SIP depend 
on one's requirement, risk taking aptitude and the time period of investment.
Align your Assets
Creating a regular income 
It is always better that you align your assets as one portfolio. Your assets or your investments need to be 
arranged in such a manner that there is a regular flow of income at different intervals. Though the reasons 
for your investment may be different, you must see your portfolio as one. This will enable you to review 
your investment in different assets. In your portfolio you must reallocate these assets from time to time to 
optimise their returns. Whatever the amount of corpus you have, you must have a mode of regular income 
in the form of dividends, interests or systematic withdrawals. Hence, you must create an income ladder 
with manageable diversified portfolio to suit your needs and requirements. 
70One of the best options to get a regular income is annuities . Annuities are monthly payments you receive 
from a financial institution after you invest a lump sum in it. The returns from these investments along with 
a part of principal form the monthly payment accruing to you. You can buy an annuity plan from a life 
insurance company or a mutual fund. A regular income can also be generated from a variety of investment 
instruments such as National Savings Certificates or deep discount bonds that give you a pre- determined 
lump sum on maturity . If you invest in these at regular intervals your investments will mature at regular 
intervals in your retirement years creating a regular income flow.
For example, Mr. Prakasa Rao who will be retiring in 2016 does not want to utilise his pension money to 
meet regular (both periodic/recurring) capital expenses like house repairs. He wants to invest some 
money for such expenses. For him, small saving schemes like NSC's -- six year tenure, 8% interest 
compounded half yearly is a handy option. If he invests ` 5000 quarterly beginning 2010, this is how his 
investments will flow to him in 2016, i.e., his first year of retirement: 
Other avenues which can be tapped for a regular income are post office monthly income schemes 
(POMIS), senior citizen's savings scheme, bank FD's and bonds and other debt products. Income could 
also come from dividends, monthly income plans of mutual funds, systematic withdrawal plans (SWP) of 
mutual fund schemes along with the rent from any property you might own. 
Creating a Lump Sum Income 
Besides a regular income, you will also require lump sum amount in your post-retirement years. Your 
requirements may relate to the higher education of your children, children's marriage or a sudden illness, 
etc. In this case, the needs are classified as : 
Future needs: These needs are known and can be listed in terms of the amount required as and when 
they arise. You have two alternatives: (a) Invest the lump sum ( large amount ) and 
receive a lump sum on maturity . You may opt for infrastructure bonds with a suitable 
tenure. Other options available are NSC's and Government of India Savings Bonds (RBI 
bonds), Kisan Vikas Patra and fixed maturity plans which mutual fund companies launch 
regularly and (b) invest a fix amount regularly and receive a lump sum on maturity . If you 
choose to save regularly , a mutual fund SIP or post office and bank recurring deposits will 
be most suitable for you 
Unforeseen needs: Needs may arise due to sudden illness requiring prolonged hospitalisation. You need 
to keep certain reserves for such contingencies.
Tax Planning 
Taxes are levied on your retirement funds. Therefore proper tax planning is required before you retire if you 
wish to take advantage of your retirement benefits. Your investment in mutual funds, shares, real estate 
and other assets need to be reallocated so that you are not burdened with tax after retirement.` 5000 8005
` 5000 8005
` 5000 8005Jan 2010
April 2010
July 2010
October 2010 ` 5000Jan 2016
April 2016
July 2016
October 2016 8005 Investment Payback
71Managing Risk 
If you want your investment to be 100% safe, bank fixed deposit can be your choice. But there is some risk 
involved in other types of investment whether it is debt or equity . In equity funds you are subject to mark et 
risks and in debt funds there is the risk of inflation. At times you would like to keep your funds handy for 
emergencies, meaning thereby you want liquidity . This kind of liquid money earns higher returns. People in 
general fear that they have not saved enough for the future and therefore they need to manage their 
retirement funds carefully . Taxes are another unplanned expense which has to be taken care of. 
72CHAPTER 8
Have you ever wondered how the government runs its offices or pays the salaries of the police 
department, army , air force and navy employees? The government requires money for all these and a 
variety of other essential services such as electricity , water provided to you. The government collects 
money from the general public in the form of taxes which it uses for different developmental schemes and 
functioning of the economy . The general public may comprise salaried people, business people, 
industrialists and many other service providers. All these people pay taxes with the expectation that the 
government would function efficiently . TAXES & Y OU
73Education cess 
Whether you feel charitable
or not, the  government 
Excise duty on fuel 
This levied on petrol & diesel
at ` 2 a litre. This is used for
rural development & state
projects, besides being shared
by National Highways Authority
of India & the 
Secondary & higher
education cess 
This is the other surcharge
levied on most taxes to better
the education system 
Excise duty on fuel 
This levied on petrol & diesel
at ` 2 a litre. This is used for
rural development & state
projects, besides being shared
by National Highways Authority
of India & the Dividend distribution tax 
Companies & debt/debt-riented
mutual funds do have to pay
a dividend distribution tax,
& they usually deduct this from
the dividend Securities transaction tax 
Every time you buy or sell
shares on a stock exchange,
a friction of the money is
deducted as securities
 transaction tax (STT) Gift tax 
If you receive a gift worth more
than ` 50,000 from a friend,
you have to pay tax on it. National calamity contingent duty 
Did you know that when you buy
a car , SUV or a two -wheeler , 1% of
the price you pay goes into the
coffers of the National Calamity
Contigency F und? F rom this year on,
the list includes mobile phones Entertainment tax 
This tax is the reason why
movie tick ets are so expensive. Clean energy cess 
This is imposed on all producers
of coal, lignite and peat at the rate
of Rs. 50 a tonne. The cess filters
down to the manufacturer of
products in which these are used,
and eventually to you, when you
pay for the product. Wealth tax 
If you have assets, such as
cash, jewellery , cars, a second
property , whose combined
value is more than 30 lakh Luxury tax 
Whenever you book a hotel
room, find out the rate inclusive
of all taxes. 
Taxes in addition
to income tax 
In your lifetime, you definitely have to pay taxes, in fact, you have probably already paid sales tax. Have 
you wondered or questioned why you had to pay more at times? The prices that we pay when we buy 
things in the mark et, is inclusive of taxes that have been charged on them. We bear taxes when we spend 
money and also when we earn money . Not many of us willingly part with their hard earned money for 
taxes. You must have often heard your elders' say, "what do we get that we should pay taxes?" Payment of 
taxes is not only the duty of every citizen but an essential requirement for existence of our country as a 
prosperous, secure, stable and a just nation- state. 
You know that government spends money for providing many public services, like, highways, police, 
defence, etc., and basic facilities such as schools and hospitals to the poor and underprivileged thus 
creating an egalitarian society . It is also used for funding developmental programmes and services. 
Government gets money from taxes and therefore it is vital for all its citizens to pay taxes. However , at the 
same time it is important for us to learn to be wise and smart so that all taxes that we legally owe are paid – 
and not a rupee more. 
74How taxes affect our economy? 
Taxes, the main source of revenue are used by the rulers or the government to carry out many 
functions. No government in the world can run its administrative offices without funds and it 
has no such system incorporated in itself to generate profit from its functioning . Therefore, it 
can be well understood that the purpose of taxation is very simple and obvious for proper 
functioning of a state. The expenditures of the government include providing economic 
infrastructure (roads, railways, etc.), public services (education systems, health care 
systems, public transportation, etc.), public utilities (energy , water and waste management, 
etc.) for the enforcement of law and order , to meet expenditures on defence, and the operation 
of government itself . The money is also utilized for relief and rehabilitation in case of natural 
disasters such as floods, earthquak es, tsunamis, etc. Space programme, missile programme 
and nuclear programme are also funded from the revenue collected as tax. 
Taxes, apart from being a source of revenue to government also are used to influence the 
functioning of the economy (the government's strategy for doing this is called fiscal policy), or 
to modify patterns of consumption or employment within an economy . It influences the 
economy by affecting resource allocation, consumer behaviour and even the nation's 
productivity and growth. To reallocate its scarce resources for ensuring welfare, government 
may tax highly some commodities (say luxuries). It regulates consumption of some 
commodities (tobacco is taxed, for example, to discourage smoking , and other injurious 
commodities like alcohol, etc). To ensure long-term growth it may impose taxes on production 
of consumer goods and give concession for production of capital goods. Apart from interest 
rates, the deductions allowed in taxes for the savings also inspire people to save. The provision 
of exemptions of income that have been diverted into various saving schemes results in 
increased saving in the economy . Taxes also help in redistribution. Normally , this means 
transferring wealth from the richer sections of society to poorer sections, thereby reducing 
inequality in the income levels. When government imposes taxes on the richer section and 
uses it for the welfare of it citizens, it is transferring wealth from few high income groups to low 
income groups. T axes also mak e the government accountable. The government tax citizens, 
and citizens in turn demand accountability from their government.
Tax planning implies minimization of taxes -- pay as little as possible by saving and investing wisely . The 
goal is to arrange financial affairs so as to minimize taxes. How can we do this? The key lies in prudent and 
effective tax planning . It is important to plan for taxes as it affects your personal budget-- your savings, 
expenditure and consumption so dearly . Tax planning means devising strategies all the year round so as to 
minimize the liability of tax that one owes to the government. You have to plan sensibly so as to pay less 
money to the government as tax thereby reducing your tax burden. As a result save more money for 
yourself . Planning taxes reduces the burden of tax on a person and also helps him to make savings by 
investing in various saving schemes. 
India has a well- developed taxation structure. The tax system in India is mainly a three -tier system, 
comprising the Central government, State Governments and the local government's organizations which 
include panchayats and municipalities. Did you know? 
75History of taxation: 
Taxation dates back to earliest recorded history . In the beginning , in all societies, the most 
common way to collect taxes was in kind. T axes were paid in the form of gold- coins, cattle, 
grains, raw materials and even by rendering personal service. As economies became money 
based, countries started collecting taxes in cash. In addition to the revenues from land, tax on 
the basis of ownership of immovable properties also became prevalent. Evidence show that all 
historical leaders and head countrymen collected taxes to run its authority . 
In India, the tradition of taxation has a long history . Archeological findings indicate a taxation 
system as old as about 6000 years ago at a place called Lagash. It finds its references in many 
ancient books like 'Manu Smriti' and 'Arthasastra'. Manu, the sage and lawgiver in Vedic times, 
stated in his 'Manu Smriti' that the king could levy tax and advised that taxes should be related 
to the profession, income and expenditure of the person. With the coming on of the Mughals in 
India, the country witnessed a sea of change in the taxation system of India. Although, they 
also practised the same norm of taxation but it was more homogeneous in structure and 
collection. 
The period of British rule in India witnessed some remarkable change in the taxation system of 
India. The objectives of taxation were designed to protect and enlarge the economic and 
strategic interests of the East India Company and the Crown. After the revolt of 1857, the first 
formal income -tax on traders and professionals became operative in 1860. Setting up of 
administrative system and taxation system was first done in the history of taxation system in 
India in 1922. Independent India brought out changes in the nature and objectives of taxation, 
which became directly linked with national programmes for citizens' welfare. Nowadays 
taxation is seen as an instrument not only to augment finance of the government but also to 
fulfill certain social objective, both being interlink ed. 
Taxes are collected from a number of sources. The government raises revenue from a variety of taxes -- 
taxes on income (like, individual income tax, corporate income tax) taxes on property (like, wealth tax, 
estate taxes, death duties, property taxes), taxes on commodities (like, sales tax, excise duties, customs 
duties) and other taxes (like service taxes, entertainment taxes).
Different taxes that we pay 
As said earlier we pay different types of taxes to the government, which can be classified as direct and 
indirect. Direct taxes are those that are imposed and paid by the tax payer directly to the 
government (like, taxes on income and wealth) 
Indirect taxes are those taxes that we pay indirectly 
to the government (like, taxes on commodities). An 
understanding of these taxes is necessary for us to 
be aware of the payments that we have to make. In this world nothing is certain but death 
and taxes 
-Benjamin F ranklin 
76Did you Know? 
For all financial transactions (be it investing, 
purchasing, etc.) that you make above a certain 
limit, it is now mandatory to quote your 
Permanent Account Number (PAN). This 
makes it easier for taxman to trace all your 
investment/savings. This number is mandatory 
for filing income tax returns, opening a 
depository account, buying or selling property , 
large cash transaction- You need a PAN for 
many things that affect your life. Income tax 
When you start earning incomes beyond the 
exemption limit, you will have to pay taxes 
which are progressive, meaning that the more 
you earn, the more you pay. Income tax is levied 
on the income of individuals or on the profits 
earned by companies and businesses. Personal 
income tax and corporate income tax together 
contribute towards a major share of tax revenue 
to central government. The Income Tax Act was 
incorporated in India in1860. Income taxes are 
imposed by the Government of India on taxable 
income of Hindu Undivided Families (HUFs), 
companies, individuals, firms, co-operative 
societies and trusts (which are identified as a 
body of individuals and association of persons). 
Even the gifts that you receive from persons other than relatives come under the purview of income tax 
and are included in your income. 
Corporate Tax 
When a company earns profit, corporate tax has to be paid. Corporate tax is the tax charged on the profits 
earned by associations and companies by several jurisdictions. The excess of earnings that a company 
makes over the expenses incurred (cost of production) will be your profit. On this profit, the company has 
to pay corporate tax according to rules. This corporate tax also applies to foreign corporations that have 
economic bases in India ( e.g, Microsoft, Agro -tech, Hewlett-P ackard). It applies to all people working for a 
corporation, including income for work done in a foreign country and work done for a corporation that is 
situated in a foreign country . The rate of corporate tax in India depends on whether the profits have been 
passed on to the shareholders or not. 
Capital Gains Tax 
Did you know that you will have to pay taxes on all your capital gains that you receive upon the sale of 
assets? A capital gain is any income generated by selling a capital investment (business stocks, paintings, 
houses, family business, farmhouse, etc.). The 'gain' here is the difference between the price originally 
paid for the investment and money received upon selling it, and is taxable. 
Wealth Tax 
The wealth that you possess also entails you to contribute towards the tax exchequer . Wealth tax is levied 
on the property owned depending on the mark et value of it. If you possess net wealth over a certain 
exemption limit (now `. 30 lakh) other than ownership of one residential property it is mandatory to pay 
wealth tax and file a return to avoid tax collector knocking at your door. 
Excise Duty 
You pay taxes to the government while purchasing commodities. One among the indirect tax is the excise 
duty which is one of the most well known forms of taxation in India. Excise duties are imposed on goods at 
the time of production. It is paid to the government by the factory itself , but in reality the burden of the tax 
falls on those who buy the goods. The producer increases the prices of goods they sell to cover the amount 
that they have paid in form of excise duties. The rates of excise duties vary depending on the nature of 
commodity . Excise tax also serves various purposes of price control, adequate supply of essential 
commodities, promotion of small- scale industries and industrial growth.
77Customs Duty 
During your visits to the mark et you might have come across foreign brand products varying from toys, 
chocolates to stationary and consumable items and probably wanted to purchase it but felt hesitant 
seeing the price tag. They are highly priced because of the foreign exchange rate (the value of Indian rupee 
compared to the foreign currency) and also it includes the customs duty imposed on them. Government 
imposes customs duty not just with the intention of earning revenue but also to control the commodities 
moving out and moving in the country . Customs duties are charged on those commodities which we bring 
in from other countries (import duties) and which we export to other countries (export duties). Usually , the 
goods that are imported to the country are charged customs duty along with educational cess. The 
customs duty is evaluated on the value of the transaction of the goods. The Central Board of Excise and 
Customs under the Ministry of Finance manages the customs duty process in the country . 
Types of state taxes 
Apart from the central taxes, we also pay certain taxes on various goods and services to the state 
government. Let us see which these taxes are: 
Sales Tax/VAT 
Probably this is one of the taxes that you have been paying indirectly to the government. When you 
purchase commodities or when you eat at a restaurant your bills are inclusive of the sales/V AT taxes. The 
state governments in India impose sales tax which is paid by the dealer or shopk eeper and this amount is 
later added to the price of the good. The taxes range in percentages according to the type of goods. 
Essential commodities such as food, room and board are not taxed. Petroleum, tobacco and liquor are 
taxed, but the percentage varies from region to region, as the state governments have regulatory control. 
In most cases, sales taxes are charged on the sale of movable goods. The sales taxes have been replaced 
with Value Added Tax (VAT). This is the tax that a manufacturer needs to pay while purchasing raw 
materials and a trader needs to pay while purchasing goods. VAT is eventually expected to replace sales 
tax. All goods and services provided by business individuals and companies come under the ambit of VAT. 
The VAT rates of petroleum, tobacco, liquor and so on are higher and differ from state to state. 
Goods and Service Tax (GST) 
Proposals are being carried out to combine tax on goods as well as services such as VAT, excise duties, 
service tax and replace them with a single GST. All financial contribution made in the distribution chain will 
therefore be taxed under GST.
Other taxes: 
In addition, there are some other state and local taxes that are applicable. They are: 
▪ Octroi/entry tax 
▪ Stamp duty on asset transfer
▪  Property/building tax 
▪ Agriculture income tax 
Tax Planning 
Usually tax planning is in the air during the month Feb-March when you hear and see 
advertisements for everything from tax saving bonds, insurance products to tax saving mutual 
funds. Many of the tax saving avenues are not touched upon as we do not give due time and 
thought to understand and evaluate different options that are specific to the financial situation 
78and usually end within the conventional tax saving techniques. However , if you are to think of 
tax planning not just as a tax saving exercise instead as a part of overall investment strategy 
then you have to smarten up the tax-planning exercise. The tax-saving investment that you 
choose can eventually play a significant part in achieving your financial goals. 
How to plan for taxes 
Arranging transactions helps in optimizing our tax liability . An understanding of the tax process and tax 
strategies will help to lower your taxes taking full advantage of the tax benefits. For this, the provisions of 
the Income Tax Act: all accessible allowances, exemptions, deductions, etc., are to be used judiciously . 
Know the T ax process: Basics of income tax 
WHO? All residents in India, whose total income level is more than the maximum 
exemption limit, are under the domain of chargeable income tax. The payment of the 
income tax is to be calculated on the total income of the last year in the relevant financial 
assessment year . 
WHEN? The return has to be filed by 30 th September of the assessment year if the 
individual, being a sole proprietor , has his accounts subjected to tax audit or is a partner of 
a partnership firm whose accounts are subject to tax audit and by 31 st July of the 
assessment year for any other assessee. 
HOW? The income tax payments are paid in the sort of tax deducted at source (TDS), tax 
collected at source (T CS), and advance tax before the last due date of March 31st. 
WHY? Government earns revenue through taxes so as to provide basic services and certain 
amenities to its people in the national interest. 
Exemptions: Income tax
Exemptions refer to specified income, which 
are earned but not taxable. It means that at the 
time of calculating annual income, this type of 
income will not come under the purview of tax. 
These include agriculture income, dividend 
income, gratuity , and receipt in respect of 
commutation of pension, leave encashment, 
proceeds from an insurance company , LTA 
rules, etc. There are certain expenses that you 
incur that get you tax benefits. School fees paid 
for two children, the principal amount repaid of 
housing loan and the medical insurances 
premium paid for self, family and parents, 
expenditure on treatment cost of chronic 
illness of your dependant can be deducted from Tax tip: Buying medical insurance for your 
parents not only ensures better treatment for 
them but also will help you to get an additional 
deduction in taxes . Tax tip: You can claim a deduction of rent paid 
even if you are not getting house rent allowance 
(HRA). If you are staying with your parents pay 
them the rent and avail deduction in your tax. 
Tax tip: Chronic illness of a dependant and 
disabilities can be used to save on taxes . Avail 
tax deductions for the expenses. 
79your taxable income. Interest paid on educational loans is also deducted from the taxable income and is 
now available even to the parent or spouse of the borrower . Availing a home loan helps to claim 
exemptions for the interest payments of up to `1,50,000 in case of a self-occupied house. The claim can 
be made even on loans taken for repair , renewal or reconstruction of an existing property . The taxpayers 
also can claim exemption for the house rent paid. An investment in the medical insurance scheme ensures 
not only insurance benefits, but also helps to avail tax exemptions. The donations made to particular 
funds/institutions and contributions made to the recognized political parties are also exempted from taxes.
Deductions: 
Deductions refer to those investments or payments which will be deducted from the total income. There 
are various deductions provided by the Indian Income Tax Act. The tax deductions help to deduct an 
amount from the taxable income and save tax. 
The maximum reduction available for investing in Provident Fund, Public Provident Fund, accrued interest 
on National Saving Certificate, Life Insurance Premium, National Saving . 
Evergreen favorites that lighten tax burden 
The most preferred investment tax-saving avenues are: 
▪ Life insurance policy : It has three benefits - covers risk, save tax and also is an investment 
strategy . 
▪ Public Provident Fund: A long-term investment instrument with assured interest rate and 
contributions and the interest earned thereon is wholly exempt from tax. 
▪ Fixed deposit scheme : Fixed deposits with banks having a lock-in period of 5 years earn tax 
exemption but the interest earned shall be taxed. 
▪ National Saving Certificates : Safest investment option as it is backed by the government 
with a maturity period of six years. The interest earned is taxable. 
▪ Home loans : The principal amount repaid, stamp duty and registration charges are eligible 
for deduction. 
▪ Children's tuition fees: Amount paid towards tuition fees of any two children of an individual 
is eligible for deduction.
▪ Equity Linked Saving Schemes (ELSS):  As these are investments in equity , they carry an 
inherent risk. An investor who can take on risk in the quest for high returns, should be 
investing in ELSS schemes through Systematic Investment Plan (SIP) as it is the best 
solution to counter the volatility in mark ets. 
Certificate, tuition fees paid for children's education (maximum 2 children), principal component of home 
loan repayment, 5-year fixed deposits with banks and Post Office and Equity Linked Savings Schemes 
(ELSS) is ` 1,00,000. Choices from these tax-saving avenues should be made in terms of the risk-return 
80trade -off. Investments have to be planned in such a way that the post-tax yield is the highest possible and 
keeping in view the vital parameters of safety and liquidity . Investment in employment provident fund is a 
compulsory contribution and will give you an amount at the time of retirement. Public Provident Fund and 
National Savings Certificate turn out to be attractive in terms of assured returns and safety of capital. 
Choice between PPF and NSC depends whether you are saving to provide for a long- term need or you 
prefer to make lump sum investment and have a shorter investment horizon. In the former situation PPF 
would be a better option and in case of latter , the option may be NSC with duration of 6 years or fixed 
deposits with banks for 5 years. These tax saving measures provide assured rates return, however , offer 
only negative real returns in an inflationary scenario. 
Deductions are also available on various insurance schemes. But the choice of an insurance scheme 
should be made without tax saving benefits taking precedence over the insurance aspect. Investment in 
the insurance schemes should have the best insurance cover and not just tax sops. The tax deductions 
help to deduct an amount from the taxable income and therefore save tax. Whereas, investment in 
equities through ELSS scheme will help to beat inflation and have the lowest lock-in period of 3 years. 
However , after the direct tax code comes into effect ELSS will cease to be a tax saving option. Tax reliefs 
are also available on investments in long-term infrastructure bonds of specified companies. The interest 
rates of these bonds are not as high as that offered by the banks on fixed deposits, but still as it is offered as 
an additional tax shield they turn out to be worth investing . 
Example 
Let us see how two friends, Latha and Prameela contributed in form of income tax. Latha works in a 
multinational company and Prameela is a government official, both earning a total income of `10,00,000. 
Latha's company provides her with some allowances -- transport allowance, academic allowance. Etc., 
which is exempted from tax. She has not yet bought a house and is staying in rented apartment for which 
she pays monthly rent of ` 12,000. She does not take much interest in the tax planning but still has some 
savings which ensure deduction of ` 60,000 from her taxable income. Therefore her taxable income 
amounts to ` 7,52,800 for which she shells out ` 85,037 as income tax. 
LATHA 
Salary Details Amount Tax planning strategies 
Gross Salary 10,00,000 
Less allowances (her
company provides her
transport allowance, leave
travel allowance, etc.) 80,000
Exemption of house rent
allowance 1,07,200 
Any other exemptions She could have claimed exemptions for the 
interest paid towards housing loans provided 
she had availed home loan. 0 
INCOME AFTER
EXEMPTIONS 8,12,800
Deductions under Chapter
VI-A60,000
81Other deductions (medical
insurance, medical treat-
ment, donation, etc.) Medical insurance premium for self and family
could have given a deduction of `15,000 and
` 20,000 in case of senior citizens. 0
Aggregate deduction (max.
limit 110 is ` 1,00,000). 60,000She should have some exposure to mark et so that
her savings multiply at a faster rate and enable
her to claim the maximum limit of exemption. 
 TOTAL TAXABLE INCOME 7,52,800 
TAX PAYABLE 85,037 
PREMEELA 
Salary Details Amount Tax planning strategies 
Gross Salary 10,00,000 
Less allowances (govern-
ment provides her transport
allowance, academic
allowance, etc.) 80,000 
Exemption of house rent
allowance 1,07,200
Any other exemptions 1,50,000She gets the maximum exemption for the interest
paid towards housing loan. This reduces her
home loan burden. 
INCOME AFTER EXEMPTIONS 6,62,800 
Deductions under Chapter
VI-A 1,00,000 She has got deduction for the maximum limit of
exemption. She has reduced the principal amount 
that has been repaid towards her home loan and
also has judiciously invested in various schemes
like ELSS , PPF, NSC and New P ension Scheme
with a view to get tax benefits as well as earn
return for future. 
15,000Medical insurance premium for self and family
has provided her a deduction of `15,000.Other deductions (Medical
Insurance, Medical treat-
ment, Donation etc) 
Investment in Infrastructure
bonds20,000She has availed the additional deduction on this
investment 
TOTAL TAXABLE INCOME 5,27,800
TAX PAYABLE 38,687 Planning has helped in reducing her tax payment
by ` 46,350 and she has the benefit of earning
returns in future. 
82Final but vital T ax tip: 
Plan, prepare and organise your taxes:
▪ Keep records of investments/savings 
organized and filed
▪ Keep copies of tax returns filed for the 
previous years
▪ Spend time for calculating and planning 
for saving taxes 
▪ Tax policies k eep changing . Keep a track 
of it Taxes have an impact on nearly every part of your 
financial life, investment, savings, cash 
management, debt, home ownership, retirement 
planning , insurance, etc. Therefore taxes being 
crucial financial elements needs to be understood 
and planned. It is not just another dreary task that 
has to be conducted annually instead it is an 
opportunity for wealth creation. So it is important 
to give tax planning exercise a fair attention and 
time. Every citizen availing the tax incentives 
provided by the government not only reduces his 
tax liability but also ensures a better future through 
compulsory savings. 
83CHAPTER 9
Financial literacy is a challenge for India's large, young and growing population. Increasing income of the 
middle class, along with a high saving rate requires an understanding of financial matters even at the 
school stage. In addition, the country has a sound banking system and healthy financial sector . At this 
juncture it is important to engage our young population in financial education and also secure them 
financially in future. 
The study of the subject helps the young to properly manage their money and make optimal decisions for 
their future. Personal financial literacy includes the ability to read, analyse, manage and communicate 
about their financial condition that affects their material well being . It helps in making a financial plan for 
the future, discuss issues relating to finance comfortably and enable them to take informed financial 
decision throughout their lives.
As is evident an advance course of personal finance will include an elaborate discussion on topics such as 
student's debts loan consolidation, savings, insurance, budgeting , investment in different portfolio like 
financial assets and real estate. It can then equip the learners with practical financial knowledge and skills 
needed to make informed financial decisions throughout their lives. CAREER PLANNING IN PERSONAL FINANCE 
84Scope of Personal Finance 
There is a need to investigate whether an economy has scope for learners of personal finance. The world 
of work has changed dramatically in the last decade. On examining the nature of work, one finds ample 
opportunity for learners in the field of personal finance. There is a rising number of self directed investment 
plans and a growing number of seniors who wish to invest in effective retirement plans. 
You must have observed whenever you are considering buying an insurance policy or investing in a mutual 
fund, you try to contact an agent dealing with such financial products. The agent then advises us on 
various details like premium, number of years of the policy , the risk involved and the amount assured on 
maturity of the policy . The agents because of their expertise and training given by insurance companies 
have managed to pursue such a vocation. Similarly mutual fund companies also have trained agents to sell 
their products. If anyone goes to the income tax office to file their returns, there are large number of people 
offering to help them fill in all kinds of forms (Form 16 for salaried people). Banks also have agents to assist 
to fill up PPF forms, fixed deposit forms, loan application forms, etc. These individuals by virtue of their 
training and experience have the ability to advise others on personal finance issues. 
Therefore, a course in personal finance can be an option for a lucrative career in this field. 
Career planning in personal finance 
Career planning means acquiring a required degree, finding a job in a good company or be self-employed, 
showing up for work each day and eventually securing a retired life with lump sum payment. In this field, 
people earn their living by advising people with respect to investment, insurance and other purchase and 
sale of financial products. They can also help in making plan for college funding , estate planning and 
general investment analysis. They can enter the field as an accountant, auditor , insurance sales agent, 
lawyer , commodities and financial services and personal financial consultant.
Self -Employment 
As a self-employed person, the personal finance expert needs to build a customer base because they are 
the prospective clients. These bases can be strengthened by sponsoring seminars, lectures or through 
social and business contacts or simply by contacting them on telephone, taking advantage of the wide 
subscriber base in India. The advisors may also work for finance and insurance companies, including 
securities and commodities mark et, banks, and financial investment plans in both rural and urban areas.
Qualifications 
This field of work requires certain qualifications for effective conduct of the business. They look for 
candidates with a bachelor's degree in accounting , finance, economics, business, mathematics or law. 
Courses in investment, tax planning , real estate planning and risk management are also helpful. They may 
also seek a certified financial planner , the chartered financial analyst and the chartered financial 
consultant designation. A love of mathematics and finance is necessary for financial planners. One would 
also need to possess computer skills, problem solving skills and decision making skills. 
Competency of successful people 
i. Set goals in various aspects of life and progress towards goal. 
ii. Adapt time management techniques. 
iii. Exhibit integrity . 
iv. Accountable for decisions and actions taken. 
v. Learn good writing and communication skills. 
85vi. Open to new ideas. 
vii. Share knowledge to assist and mentor others. 
viii. Take on new training and work on new skills acquired. 
ix. Anticipate problem and work proactively to implement solutions. 
x. Understand operations, structure and culture of organisations. 
You can also become a highly successful financial consultant. See if you can list down the 
competency required for becoming a financial consultant in this field. 
You can become… 
Financial planners help an individual or an institution plan their saving , income and investment. They are 
trained with numbers and are able to understand complicated financial and legal documents. They can be 
self-employed or an agent of a company . They advise people on appropriate investment opportunities with 
respect to changing interest rates and the existing economic scenario of the country . 
They also examine an individual's short-term or long-term financial situation and help them analyse their 
own financial matters such as saving and loans, investment services, purchase and sale of financial 
products, mutual funds, individual retirement account, insurance, real estate or tax sheltered investment 
plan. 
Financial analysts analyse the financial statements of banks, firms or a companies. They assess the 
performance of stocks, bonds, commodities and other types of investment. They study company's 
financial statements and analyse commodity prices, sales, costs, expenses and tax rates to determine a 
company's value by projecting its future earnings. They often meet with company's officials to gain a 
better insight into firm's prospect and management. 
They provide guidance to either individual or institution regarding investment decisions in mutual funds, 
hedge funds, insurance companies, money managers and non-profit organisations with large 
endowments. They also assist security dealers, such as banks and other firms, sell shares and bonds. 
These specialists are highly experienced and qualified people and usually advise education institutions 
and other similar organisations on how to invest their provident and pension funds. 
Then, there are firms who even appoint analysts with specialisation and understand how new regulations, 
policies and political and economic trends may impact their investment. 
Risk analysts evaluate the risks to be borne by the company considering the economic scenarios with 
special focus on currency futures, derivatives, short selling and other investment decisions. These are 
highly complex financial products. They can also calculate risks in portfolio decisions, project loss if any, 
and also suggest how to limit losses or volatility using measures like that of diversifying investments. 
Portfolio managers managers are responsible for the overall portfolio and select the mix of products and 
industries. They take decisions regarding the purchase or sale of their shares in connection with the 
changing mark et conditions. Besides portfolio they also advise investors and suggest strategies for 
profitable investments. 
Rating analysts evaluate the debt paying ability of any company . They also analyse budget, cost and 
credit management of the company . On the basis of their evaluation they rate the performance of the 
company and also find out whether the government is defaulting on its bonds. 
Conclusion 
Ensuring good personal finance education in schools will apprise students about asset management and 
prevent them from making mistak es. It cannot be denied that this supplementary reading material will 
enrich a student's learning experience and its content will be complementary to other curriculum material. 
It is hoped that students enjoy reading this and consider the possibility of becoming a personal financial 
consultant. Earn well, spend carefully , save moderately and invest more. 
86
Department of Education in Social Sciences 
National Council of Educational Research and T raining 
New Delhi 
